Section 7.5 of the new PS goes part-way to articulating the mediator's responsibilities in regard
to negotiations, as does s 7.7. However, s 7 could be improved by adding to s 7.5 or s 7.7 those portions of
ss 9.4 and 9.7 of the old PS. Section 9.8 of the old PS is also an important provision which has been almost entirely omitted from the new PS. Sections
9.7 and 9.8 not only raise several values of mediation (eg self-determination and outcome fairness), they also speak to
the relationship between those values. Self-determination is the central value underpinning mediation, and participants,
providing they are fully informed, are free to arrive at a decision which is different from the decision a judge may have
imposed. 131
New PS
8 Ethical conduct and professional relations
8.1: “A mediator must mediate only where they have the competence to do so” (emphasis added) (cf s 7.3 of the old
PS).8.2: “A mediator must not use information obtained in mediation for personal gain or advantage” (cf s 5.4 of the old
PS).8.3: “A mediator must adhere to the ethical code or standards prescribed by the professional organisation or association
of which they are a member or by whom they are employed” (cf s 5.7 of the old PS).8.4: “A mediator should encourage
participants to consider the interests of any vulnerable stakeholders”.8.5: “A mediator should encourage participants
to obtain other professional support when appropriate but should refrain from recommending the services of particular
individuals or firms” (see ss 5.3 and 9.6 of the old PS).8.6: “A mediator may liaise with other relevant professionals with
permission from the relevant participant” (see s 6.6 of the old PS, which deals with confidentiality and its exceptions).8.7:
“A mediator should extend professional courtesy to other professionals engaged by the participants” (see s 8 of the old
PS).8.8: “A mediator should, where possible, engage in professional debriefing, peer consultation and mentoring of less
experienced mediators” (cf ss 7.1 and 7.2 of the old PS). Old PS
Section 8 of the new PS draws on ss 5-9 of the old PS. 5 Impartial and ethical practice
5.1: Mediators must avoid a conflict of interest or possible bias in recommending the services of other professionals. Where possible, the mediator should provide several alternatives (see ss 3.2(f) and 8.5 of the new PS). 5.2: Prohibited a mediator from using information “about participants” for personal gain (see s 8.2 of the new PS). 5.3: Provided that “mediators should adhere to … the code of conduct or ethical standards prescribed by the organisation of
which they are members” (see s 8.3 of the new PS). 7 Competence
Statement of principle: “Mediators must be competent and have relevant skills and knowledge”.