Some guidance on behaviour which is
not inconsistent with good faith in mediation is also available from cases 26 and commentaries 27 from Australia and
overseas. Good faith does not require a party to act against self-interest and it does not require a party to take “any step
to advance the interests of the other party”. 28 It does not preclude a party from taking a strong position at the outset and
from being reluctant to make concessions. 29 Good faith does not require the parties to engage in total disclosure. 30 There
is no requirement to reveal all of one's interests, negotiation goals and bottom lines. A lawyer cannot, however, mislead
the mediator or his or her opponent about a material fact, for it is recognised that such action (or inaction, where a false
statement needs to be corrected) constitutes bad faith. 31
Bad faith behaviour also includes use of mediation “solely” to delay litigation (or to burden the opposing party) or to
secure discovery.32 Ultimately, decisions about whether or not a participant has acted in good faith or bad faith will turn
on a combination of factors set in the context of each individual case.There is one major difference between s 11 of the
old PS and s 5 of the new PS. Section 11.3 of the old PS allowed a mediator to withdraw when he or she believed any
agreement being reached was unconscionable. While this provision has been omitted from the new PS, the terms of s 5.1
of the new PS are wide enough to allow mediators to terminate the mediation if they are concerned on this point, for surely
the mediation would be “no longer suitable or productive” (emphasis added) in these circumstances.Under s 5.3 (and
previously s 11.3), the mediator can help the parties assess their dispute resolution options if the mediation does not end in
agreement. 124
New PS
6 Power and safety
6.1: “A mediator must be alert to changing balances of power in mediation and manage the mediation accordingly”. 6.2: “A mediator must consider the safety and comfort of participants”. The section then provides a list of interventions
that mediators may take, such as agreeing on behavioural guidelines, putting in place and activating security protocols,
using separate sessions or other communication technology, “having a participant's friend, representative or professional
advisor attend”, and suspending or terminating the mediation.