They include courts (the Federal Court of Australia and Supreme Court of Western
Australia) and tribunals (the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal), professional
bodies (most State and Territory law societies and bar associations), mediation agencies (eg Australian Dispute Resolution
Association Inc) and community organisations (eg Relationships Australia and community justice centres in a number of States
and Territories).2
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 2
Two sets of standards were promulgated in connection with the NMAS and came into effect on 1 January 2008: Approval
Standards which specify the qualifications and training requirements for accreditation under the system;3 and Practice Standards
which specify “the minimum practice and competency requirements of a NMAS accredited mediator”. 4 The standards were
subject to minor revision in 2012. They were extensively revised last year, as was the NMAS itself, with the revisions taking
effect from 1 July 2015. The revised Practice Standards are set within the context of a “broader document covering ancillary
aspects of the NMAS”.5 The document includes an introductory section (Part I); more formal provision with respect to RMABs,
including a requirement that they upload to a
110
National Register a list of mediators they have accredited (Part IV); provision with respect to the Register of Nationally
Accredited Mediators (Part V); and a section dealing with membership and responsibilities of the Mediator Standards Board
(MSB) (Part VI) which was established in 2010 to oversee the NMAS.6 The standards sit in the middle of the NMAS document:
the Approval Standards can be found in Part II of the document, while the Practice Standards are in Part III. This article is concerned with the revised Practice Standards for mediators operating under the NMAS. According to the
Chair of the MSB, the revised Practice Standards “ specify clearly the minimum practice and competency requirements for
mediators”. 7 In the author's opinion, this claim is overstated. There are a number of gaps and uncertainties in the revised Practice
Standards. In many ways, as this article seeks to demonstrate, the original Practice Standards better fulfilled the functions
normally served by standards of conduct of a profession. Those functions include: 8
• informing mediators of the standards of service required of them;
• inculcating in mediators the values considered intrinsic to mediation practice;
• informing users, potential users and members of the public of the standards of service they can expect of mediators;
• alerting mediators and other participants to the ethical dilemmas likely to arise in mediation practice and providing them
with guidance on “ethical” responses to those dilemmas; and
• fostering pride and public respect for the profession.