Some have disappeared from the Standards, eg s 7.3(b)(vi) “Mediator
interventions appropriate for standard difficulties in mediation” has been OMITTED. Others have been added, see eg
s 10.1(b)(viii) “reality-testing proposed outcomes in light of participants' interests, issues, underlying needs and long-
term viability”.10.1(c): lists the “ethical principles” with respect to which a mediator must have an “understanding”. The
following are listed:
(i) competence, integrity and accountability
(ii) professional conduct
(iii) self-determination
(iv) informed consent
(v) safety, procedural fairness and equity in mediation including withdrawing from or terminating the mediation
process
(vi) impartiality including the avoidance of conflicts of interest
(vii) confidentiality privacy and reporting obligations
(viii) honesty in the marketing and advertising of mediation and promotion of the mediator's practice. 10.2: Where a mediator uses a blended process such as advisory or evaluative mediation or conciliation, which involves the
provision of advice (emphasis added), the mediator must: obtain the consent of the participants; ensure that he or she has
current knowledge and experience; hold relevant professional registration and indemnity insurance; and “ensure that the
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 22
advice is provided in a manner that maintains and respects the principle of self-determination” (s 10.2(c) of the new PS, cf
s 10.5 of the old PS). 137
Old PS
Section 10 of the new PS draws on ss 7 and 10 of the old PS. 7 Competence
Statement of principle: “Mediators must be competent and have relevant skills and knowledge”. This wording has been
absorbed into ss 8.1 and 10.1 of the new PS. As to the provisions in ss 7.1-7.2, see s 8.8 of the new PS. 7.3: “Mediators should be competent and have the capacity to apply knowledge, skills and an ethical understanding
and commitment in the areas listed below. Mediators demonstrate competence by showing that they have the requisite
knowledge and skills and can apply them”.