Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 1
Journal of Civil Litigation and Practice
V olume 5
No 2, 2016
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator Accreditation System Practice Standards
Original author(s): Bobette Wolski*
Last Review: 01/01/2016
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to
the revised National Mediator Accreditation System
Practice Standards
Abstract
This article concerns the National Mediator Accreditation System (NMAS) Practice Standards which were extensively
revised in 2015. According to the Chair of the Mediator Standards Board, the standards now “specify clearly the
minimum practice and competency requirements” for NMAS accredited mediators. The study undertaken in this
article, in which the revised Practice Standards are compared with those that they replace, suggests otherwise. Numerous gaps (for example, as to the mediator's duty of confidentiality) and uncertainties (for example, as to the
meaning of “impartiality”) in the revised standards are identified. The author concludes that the revised standards
provide little guidance to mediators faced with a choice between contradictory courses of action and conflicting
values. The usefulness of the standards as a tool to educate mediators (and to instil in them a sense of the values of
mediation), participants and potential participants has been compromised by the recent revisions. The article offers
possible solutions for overcoming shortcomings in the standards. (2016) 5 JCivLP 109
Introduction
The National Mediator Accreditation System (NMAS) commenced operation in Australia on 1 January 2008. The NMAS is
an industry-based system which relies on voluntary compliance by mediator organisations (known as Recognised Mediator
Accreditation Bodies or RMABs) that agree to accredit mediators in accordance with stipulated NMAS Standards. 1 There are
almost 40 RMABs at the current time.