According to NMAS,
s 5, where a mediator is significantly non-compliant with the Approval and Practice Standards, an RMAB
may suspend the mediator's accreditation and specify any conditions, such as further training, which must
be met by the mediator prior to seeking reinstatement of accreditation. However, given that the NMAS is
a voluntary system and that mediators do not need to be accredited to practise as a mediator, suspension
may have little impact. 16 See, eg the framework imposed by legislation such as the Civil Proceedings Act 2011 (Qld). 17 The definition also appears in NMAS, Part I – Introduction, footnote 1, in the section dealing with the
application of the Standards. 18 Susan Douglas, Ethics in Mediation: Centralising Relationships of Trust  (Paper presented at the 4 th
ADR Research Network Round Table, 12-13 September 2015). 19 Despite the diversity of mediation practice, there is wide agreement that party self-determination is central
to all models of mediation. It has been called “[t]he controlling principle of mediation” (Jacqueline M
Nolan-Haley, “Lawyers, Clients, and Mediation” (1998) 73 Notre Dame Law Review 1369, 1374 ); the
driving value behind mediation (Lela Porter Love, “ Mediation: The Romantic Days Continue” (1997)
38 South Texas Law Review 735, 739 ); and “the most fundamental principle of mediation” (James J
Alfini, “Mediation as a Calling: Addressing the Disconnect Between Mediation Ethics and the Practices
of Lawyer Mediators” (2008) 49 South Texas Law Review 829, 830). 20 The term “facilitative” is not actually used in the section. However, the definition used in the Standards
tracks closely with Folberg and Taylor's early definition of mediation – one which has been described as
facilitative. Folberg and Taylor defined mediation as: “The process by which the participants, together
with the assistance of a neutral person or persons, systematically isolate disputed issues in order to
develop options, consider alternatives, and reach a consensual settlement that will accommodate their
needs”: see J Folberg and A Taylor, Mediation: A Comprehensive Guide to Resolving Conflicts Without
Giving In (Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, 1988) 7. 21 Laurence Boulle, Mediation: Principles, Process, Practice  (LexisNexis Butterworths, 3 rd  ed, 2011)
43-47. Boulle's framework is one of a number of categorisations available.