Some
commentators favour active intervention by the mediator to ensure that the interests of vulnerable third parties are
protected. 56 Other authors take a more moderate approach on this issue. Hyman believes that a mediator should deal with
matters of fairness and justice in mediation but only to a limited extent – in much the same way as lawyers might deal
with moral issues in an interview with a client – by non-directive discussion of fairness and justice issues after which the
parties are free to determine the final outcome. 57 A similar view is expressed by Hughes who suggests that the mediator
should assist the parties to assess any agreement they reach for its fairness and enforceability without the mediator taking
responsibility for the content of the agreement. 58 This appears to be the position adopted in relevant mediator standards,
which impose upon mediators duties to help the parties reach a fair and equitable settlement (eg by raising questions as
to the fairness, equity and feasibility of proposed options for settlement) and to ensure consideration of the interests of
vulnerable parties and other affected and absent third persons – while leaving primary responsibility for the decision with
the parties. 59
New PS
11 Charging for services
There are three provisions in this section which, in brief, provide that: a mediator must obtain the participants' agreement
as to the amount of fees and how they are to be apportioned (11.1); a mediator must not charge fees based on the
outcome of the mediation “or calculated in a way that could influence the manner in which the mediator conducts the
mediation” (11.2); and a mediator will return promptly any fees or charges paid in advance which exceed the amount
payable (11.3). 141
Old PS
12 Charges for services
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 25
Statement of principle: Mediators should make all charges explicit to the parties and explain how they are calculated. OMITTED
12: This section contained six points in relation to the charging of fees. In addition to the three points addressed in s 11 of
the new PS (see above), s 12 provided as follows:
• The mediator will explain any fees to be charged, ie he or she will explain how the fees are to be calculated, and any
related costs (s 12.1). • Any written agreement with the participants should include a description of any fee arrangement with the mediator (s
12.2).