A mediator could not give specific and prescriptive advice unless acknowledging that he or she was
using a blended model as provided for in s 2.7 of the old PS. These provisions were reinforced by the terms of s 10.1 of the
old PS. Under the new PS, mediators are no longer allowed to give the parties “general and non-prescriptive” information. They may give advice providing the terms of s 10.2 are fulfilled. 119
New PS
3 Conducting mediation: Preliminary conference or intake
3.1: A mediator must, in a preliminary conference or intake session, ensure that participants are provided with: “(a)
a description of mediation and the steps involved including the use of joint sessions, separate sessions and shuttle
negotiations; (b) information on how to provide feedback or lodge a formal complaint in relation to the mediator” (cf
statement of principle for s 3, and ss 3.2, 3.4 and 6 of the old PS). 3.2: Sets out tasks which might be undertaken in the preliminary conference or intake session including: (a) “assessing
whether mediation is suitable”; (b) “explaining to participants the nature and content of any agreement or requirement to
enter into mediation including confidentiality, costs and how they are to be paid”; (c) identifying who is participating; (f)
referring participants to other sources of information, advice or support; and (g) informing “participants about their roles
and those of advisors, support persons, interpreters and any other attendees” (cf ss 3.3 and 3.4 of the old PS). As was the case under the old PS, someone other than the mediator may conduct the preliminary conference or intake
session (s 3.1) (cf s 3.2 of the old PS). Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 9
Old PS
3 Starting a mediation process
Statement of principle: “Before mediating, a mediator should ensure that an outline of the mediation process has been
given to the participants”. This statement has been subsumed within the provisions of s 3.1 of the new PS. 3.1: “The diversity in mediation practice means that there are considerable differences in terms of how participants
enter into a mediation process”.