Although the statement of
principle has been omitted, its content has been incorporated into ss 8.1 and 10.1 of the new PS. 7.1 and 7.2: The essence of these two sections, which deal with debriefing and continuing professional development, has
been amalgamated into s 8.8 of the new PS. Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 18
7.3: “Mediators should be competent and have the capacity to apply knowledge, skills and an ethical understanding and
commitment in the areas listed below” (cf ss 8.1 and 10.1 of the new PS). 132
8 Inter-professional relations
Statement of principle: “Mediators should respect the relationships with professional advisers, other mediators and experts
which complement their practice of mediation”. OMITTED
8.1: Mediators should “promote cooperation with other professionals and encourage clients to use other professional
resources when appropriate” (cf 8.7 of the new PS). The underlined portion has been OMITTED.8.2: This section
contemplated the situation where there was more than one dispute resolution process being used for a particular dispute
and encouraged mediators to keep themselves informed and to inform other professionals about the processes taking place. 9 Procedural fairness
9.6: This section provided that participants should be encouraged “to obtain independent professional advice or
information” where appropriate but, in accordance with s 5.3, the mediator should provide several alternatives in
recommending referrals to avoid a conflict of interest or bias or the potential for such (cf ss 3.2(f) and 8.5 of the new PS). Commentary: s 8 Ethical conduct and professional relations
New PS s 8
Section 8 of the new PS is somewhat of a grab-bag of provisions taken from ss 5-9 of the old PS. New PS s 8.1
Mediators owe the participants a duty of competence. A “duty of competence” may be defined in a general way as a duty
to apply and integrate knowledge, skills, values and attitudes in such a way as to effectively perform the tasks required of a
mediator.