11.3: “The mediator may withdraw from the mediation process when any agreement is being reached by the participants
that the mediator believes is unconscionable” (OMITTED). The section also provided that the mediator should assist the
parties to assess further process options in taking the matter forward. This provision is similar to s 5.3 of the new PS. Commentary: s 5 Conducting mediation: Suspending or terminating
New PS s 5
Under the old PS, the topic of suspension or termination of the mediation was dealt with in s 11. Although there is some
difference in the wording, the essence of the statement of principle from s 11 and most of ss 11.1 and 11.2 of the old PS
have been retained in s 5.1 of the new PS. The terms of s 5.1 are sufficiently general to allow mediators to terminate
or suspend the mediation whenever they are of the view that continuation might “harm or prejudice one or more of the
participants”, or one or more of the participants is acting in bad faith or otherwise misusing the mediation or the usefulness
of mediation has been exhausted. Section 5.1 does not tell mediators to be alert to situations where a participant seeks “to misuse the mediation process” (see
s 11.1) but this is surely a precursor to a mediator suspending or terminating the mediation under s 5.1 of the new PS. 123
Like the original, the new provision does not define the term “good faith” (or its absence, ie “bad faith”). Historically,
these terms have been difficult to define, although some common themes of what it means to act in good faith (or bad
faith) have been discerned. There appears to be wide agreement that good faith includes some preparation, attendance
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 12
at the mediation by someone with authority to settle, and some elements of participation such as “not summarily and
without consideration” 25 immediately rejecting what the other party has to say.