Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 1
Journal of Civil Litigation and Practice
V olume 5
No 2, 2016
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator Accreditation System Practice Standards
Original author(s): Bobette Wolski*
Last Review: 01/01/2016
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to
the revised National Mediator Accreditation System
Practice Standards
Abstract
This article concerns the National Mediator Accreditation System (NMAS) Practice Standards which were extensively
revised in 2015. According to the Chair of the Mediator Standards Board, the standards now “specify clearly the
minimum practice and competency requirements” for NMAS accredited mediators. The study undertaken in this
article, in which the revised Practice Standards are compared with those that they replace, suggests otherwise.
Numerous gaps (for example, as to the mediator's duty of confidentiality) and uncertainties (for example, as to the
meaning of “impartiality”) in the revised standards are identified. The author concludes that the revised standards
provide little guidance to mediators faced with a choice between contradictory courses of action and conflicting
values. The usefulness of the standards as a tool to educate mediators (and to instil in them a sense of the values of
mediation), participants and potential participants has been compromised by the recent revisions. The article offers
possible solutions for overcoming shortcomings in the standards.
(2016) 5 JCivLP 109
Introduction
The National Mediator Accreditation System (NMAS) commenced operation in Australia on 1 January 2008. The NMAS is
an industry-based system which relies on voluntary compliance by mediator organisations (known as Recognised Mediator
Accreditation Bodies or RMABs) that agree to accredit mediators in accordance with stipulated NMAS Standards. 1 There are
almost 40 RMABs at the current time. They include courts (the Federal Court of Australia and Supreme Court of Western
Australia) and tribunals (the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal), professional
bodies (most State and Territory law societies and bar associations), mediation agencies (eg Australian Dispute Resolution
Association Inc) and community organisations (eg Relationships Australia and community justice centres in a number of States
and Territories).2
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 2
Two sets of standards were promulgated in connection with the NMAS and came into effect on 1 January 2008: Approval
Standards which specify the qualifications and training requirements for accreditation under the system;3 and Practice Standards
which specify “the minimum practice and competency requirements of a NMAS accredited mediator”. 4 The standards were
subject to minor revision in 2012. They were extensively revised last year, as was the NMAS itself, with the revisions taking
effect from 1 July 2015. The revised Practice Standards are set within the context of a “broader document covering ancillary
aspects of the NMAS”.5 The document includes an introductory section (Part I); more formal provision with respect to RMABs,
including a requirement that they upload to a
110
National Register a list of mediators they have accredited (Part IV); provision with respect to the Register of Nationally
Accredited Mediators (Part V); and a section dealing with membership and responsibilities of the Mediator Standards Board
(MSB) (Part VI) which was established in 2010 to oversee the NMAS.6 The standards sit in the middle of the NMAS document:
the Approval Standards can be found in Part II of the document, while the Practice Standards are in Part III.
This article is concerned with the revised Practice Standards for mediators operating under the NMAS. According to the
Chair of the MSB, the revised Practice Standards “ specify clearly the minimum practice and competency requirements for
mediators”. 7 In the author's opinion, this claim is overstated. There are a number of gaps and uncertainties in the revised Practice
Standards. In many ways, as this article seeks to demonstrate, the original Practice Standards better fulfilled the functions
normally served by standards of conduct of a profession. Those functions include: 8
• informing mediators of the standards of service required of them;
• inculcating in mediators the values considered intrinsic to mediation practice;
• informing users, potential users and members of the public of the standards of service they can expect of mediators;
• alerting mediators and other participants to the ethical dilemmas likely to arise in mediation practice and providing them
with guidance on “ethical” responses to those dilemmas; and
• fostering pride and public respect for the profession.
The article compares and contrasts the revised Practice Standards issued in 2015 (new PS) with the Practice Standards as they
stood at March 2012 (old PS). It also provides a detailed section-by-section commentary on the new PS and, more generally,
on mediator standards of conduct. It concludes by highlighting uncertainties and gaps in the new PS – all of which point to
a lack of clear specification of the standards of conduct required of mediators. Some suggestions for improving the new PS
are also provided.
The article begins with a brief examination of the introductory provisions of the NMAS documentation (ie Part I of the
documentation).
Comparison of new and old NMAS PS and a commentary
The new PS must be read in conjunction with the other parts of the Revised NMAS documentation. Part I is particularly
important to the subject matter of this article. It sets out:
1. the purpose of the NMAS;
2. its application;
3. the role of mediators, and
4. the NMAS structure.
According to Part I, the purpose of the NMAS is to promote “quality, consistency and accountability of NMAS accredited
mediators within the diversity of mediation practice in Australia. It informs participants in mediation (participants) about what
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 3
they can expect of a NMAS accredited mediator”. 9 These are ambitious goals and the extent to which the NMAS achieves
them is debatable.
111
The second provision in Part I deals with the application of the standards. The standards: 10
apply when a person is seeking accreditation in relation to and conducting mediation processes as defined in Section 2
of the Practice Standards. When a person practises as a mediator in other contexts, such as hybrid, blended or statutory
environments, additional requirements relevant to that context may apply.11
The implications of this provision, with its cross-reference to the definition of mediation in s 2, are discussed further in the
commentary to s 2.2 below.
Part I of the new PS then describes the mediator's role, in the following terms: “A mediator uses the knowledge, skills and
ethical principles referred to in Part III s 10.1 of the NMAS to assist participants to make their own decisions in relation to
disputes, conflicts or differences among them”.12 The words “knowledge, skills and ethical principles” complicate the sentence,
as does the reference to “Part III Section 10.1”. A simple alternative sentence is suggested in the commentary to s 2.1 below.
Standards of conduct perform an educative function for mediators, for other people who participate or who are thinking of
participating in mediation, and more generally for members of the public. The first three provisions in Part I are most likely to
be the first paragraphs that non-mediators will read. Currently, they are worded for mediators. Ideally, they should be written
with the “lay” participant in mind. More user-friendly ways of introducing mediation to the community need to be adopted.
Turning now to examine the PS contained in Part III of the NMAS documentation, the table below compares the PS. It
examines first the provision/s of the new PS, followed by the “corresponding” provision/s of the old PS, followed by the author's
commentary on the revisions and on mediator standards generally. These are not official comments released by the NMAS
drafting body (some standards and codes of conduct contain an official commentary following each rule or standard 13 but
that format has not been adopted in the NMAS Practice Standards). There is one change in format which is best noted at the
beginning. The old PS, beginning at s 2, contained a statement of principle (for want of a better phrase) immediately following
the section heading.14 This format has not been retained in the new PS and all statements of principle have been omitted, though
in some instances the content of the statement has been absorbed into the main provisions. The other general comment, an
important one, is that the language of the standards has changed so that practitioners are told that they “must” do such and such,
rather than merely that they “should” do such and such. The new PS are more prescriptive in style.15 In the table which follows,
text from the old PS which has been omitted from the new PS, is underlined and marked as “OMITTED”. This format allows
readers to see, at a glance, the many important provisions that have been deleted from the original PS.
112
NMAS Practice Standards 2015 (new PS), Part III
1 Application
1.1: “The Practice Standards apply to NMAS accredited mediators” (cf s 1.1 of the old PS).
1.2: Sets out the purpose of the PS. It provides as follows:
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 4
1.2(a): The PS “specify the minimum practice and competency requirements of a NMAS accredited mediator” (emphasis
added) (cf s 1.2(a) of the old PS).
1.2(b): The PS “inform participants and others about what they can expect of the mediation process and of a NMAS
accredited mediator” (cf s 1.2(b) of the old PS).
1.2(c): The PS “should be read in conjunction with the Approval Standards (Part II of the NMAS), with which a NMAS
accredited mediator must also comply” (cf s 1.3 of the old PS).
1.3: “Where a mediator practises under a legislative framework and there is a conflict between a provision of the Practice
Standards and a provision of that framework, the legislative framework will override the Practice Standards to the extent of
any inconsistency” (cf s 1.5 of the old PS).
NMAS Practice Standards 2012 (old PS)
1 Application
1.1: The PS purported to apply to “any mediator acting as a third party to support two or more individuals or entities to
manage, settle or resolve disputes, or to form a future plan of action through a process of mediation and who voluntarily
decides to become accredited under the National Mediator Accreditation Scheme.” It described the mediator's role (and
at the same time, defined mediation) in the following terms: “[a] mediator supports participants in a mediation process
to identify, clarify and explore issues, to generate and consider options and to make decisions about future actions and
outcomes”. OMITTED (although some of this material is included in ss 2.1 and 2.2 of the new PS).
1.1: Further provided that the Standards “are intended to govern the relationship of mediators with the participants in
the mediation, their professional colleagues, courts and the general public so that all will benefit from high standards of
practice in mediation”. OMITTED
1.2: Sets out the purpose of the PS.
1.2(a): Provided that the PS specified “practice and competency requirements for mediators”. That these were to be
regarded as “minimum” requirements was set out in s 1.4 of the old PS as mentioned below.
1.2(b): Stated that the PS “inform participants and others about what they can expect of the mediation process and
mediators”.
1.3: Provided that mediators who were voluntarily accredited under this scheme “must comply with the Approval
Standards as well as the Practice Standards” and that the two sets of standards were to be read together.
1.4: Informed the reader that: “[t]here are a range of different mediation models in use across Australia”; mediation can
take place in a variety of settings and may be used in a wide range of disputes; mediators come from diverse backgrounds
and disciplines; mediation can be used where there is conflict or to support future decision-making; mediation may
take place as a result of court or tribunal referral, as part of community schemes, or by private referral; depending on
the context, mediators might have to comply with additional requirements; mediators may practise alone or with a co-
mediator. Also, this provision established that the PS set out minimum practice requirements. The entire paragraph, with
the exception of the reference to “minimum” requirements, has been OMITTED.
1.5: This provision is in substantially the same terms as s 1.3 of the new PS. It governed in the event of inconsistency
between the PS and any legislative framework pursuant to which a mediator practised.
113
Commentary: s 1 Application
New PS s 1.1
This section has been whittled down to a single short sentence, namely that “the PS apply to NMAS accredited mediators”.
Much of the information contained in s 1.1 of the old PS has been omitted (see the discussion below).
New PS s 1.2
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 5
Section 1.2(a) draws on ss 1.2(a) and 1.4 of the old PS. It makes clear that the PS are the “minimum practice and
competency requirements” of a NMAS accredited mediator (emphasis added). However, that these are minimum standards
is at odds with s 10, which appears to give an exhaustive account of the knowledge, skills and ethical responsibilities of
mediators. (It is not s 1.2 but rather s 10 which needs to be changed).
Section 1.2(b) is at the heart of the section – the principal purpose of the PS appears to be educative in nature, ie informing
participants “and others” about what they can expect of the process and of mediators. While that is the stated purpose of
the PS, many of the provisions appear to be written for mediators and not for “others”. For example, it might be difficult
for an unrepresented first-time participant of mediation to understand the provisions of ss 2.1 and 2.2 of the new PS (see
below).
Section 1.2(c) picks up the provisions of s 1.3 of the old PS (there being no s 1.2(c) in the old PS). It is straightforward. It
emphasises the fact that the NMAS is a voluntary accreditation system and that persons who become accredited must be
prepared to comply with the Approval Standards as well as the PS.
New PS s 1.3
The terms of s 1.3 of the new PS are almost identical to those of s 1.5 of the old PS. If there is an inconsistency between
the PS and relevant legislative provisions pursuant to which a mediator is engaged (eg such as those pertaining to family
law, or to civil procedure law in many jurisdictions),16 the legislative provisions will prevail.
Provisions omitted from old PS s 1
There are a number of important provisions that have been jettisoned from s 1.1 of the old PS. These provisions
communicated to all stakeholders, from the very first paragraph, a clear statement as to who the PS applied to, a definition
of mediation, a sense of the purpose of mediation and of the role of a mediator, all conveyed in easy to understand terms
and without any need to cross-reference to other sections. The new PS do deal with the role of a mediator, both in Part
I and also in ss 2.1 and 2.2, but the terms used might be difficult for some people to understand (see the discussion
pertaining to s 2).
Section 1.1 of the old PS clearly specified the relationships the PS were intended to govern. Again, this provision has been
whittled down and the new PS appear only to govern the relationship between mediators and participants, though there is
some mention of “others” in s 1.2(b) and reference to colleagues in s 8. However, there is no sense that the new PS also
govern the mediator's relationship to courts and tribunals, and to the general public. On this point, the provision (the last
sentence) from s 1.1 of the old PS is to be preferred.
114
Section 1.1 of the old PS mentions that mediation can be used “to form a future plan of action” and to make decisions
“about future actions and outcomes”. These references have been omitted from the new PS. (While mediation is described
as a decision-making process in ss 2.1 and 2.2 of the new PS, there is no mention of the making of decisions about future
plans, actions and outcomes.) As a result, two important points have been lost from the old PS. First, mediation is not just a
dispute resolution process. It can be used for other purposes, such as to negotiate the terms of an agreement between parties
who have never dealt with each other before. Second, even if mediation is being used to resolve a dispute, it is often times
future-focused and not necessarily concerned with laying blame for past events.
The omission of s 1.4 of the old PS is of particular concern. It helped inform participants, potential participants, courts and
tribunals, and members of the public about many aspects of mediation, including: its diversity as a practice as well as the
diversity of mediators; its capacity to deal with a range of disputes; its use for dispute resolution and “deal” making; and
the ways in which mediation might come about.
New PS
2 The mediation process
2.1: “A mediator uses the knowledge, skills and ethical principles referred to in Part III Section 10.1 of the NMAS to assist
participants to make their own decisions in relation to disputes, conflicts or differences among them” (cf ss 2.1 and 7.3 of
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 6
the old PS). This provision is identical to the description of the “role of mediators in a mediation process”, used in Part I to
the new NMAS documentation.
2.2: Defines mediation as:
a process that promotes the self-determination of participants and in which participants, with the support of a mediator:
(a) communicate with each other, exchange information and seek understanding;
(b) identify, clarify and explore interests, issues and underlying needs;
(c) consider their alternatives;
(d) generate and evaluate options;
(e) negotiate with each other; and
(f) reach and make their own decisions.
The section continues: “A mediator does not evaluate or advise on the merits of, or determine the outcome of,
disputes” (emphasis added). The footnote in this provision refers the reader to s 10.2 and mentions the possibility of a
mediator using a blended process (cf s 2.7 of the old PS).
115
Old PS
2 Description of a mediation process
Statement of principle: “[t]he purpose of a mediation process is to maximise participants' decision making”. The statement
has been OMITTED
2.1: Stated that mediation “is a process in which the participants, with the support of a mediator, identify issues, develop
options, consider alternatives and make decisions about future actions and outcomes. The mediator acts as a third party to
assist the participants to reach their decision”. Some of this sub-section has survived and is incorporated into s 2.2 of the
new PS but the underlined portions have been OMITTED.2.2: Provided that “[m]ediation processes are not a substitute for
individual or organisational legal and/or other expert advice, or individual counselling or therapy. Mediation processes may
not be appropriate for all disputants or all types of disputes”. OMITTED
2.3: “The goal of a mediation process is agreed upon by the participants with the assistance of the mediator. Examples of
goals may include assisting the participants to make a wise decision, to clarify the terms of a workable agreement and/or
future patterns of communication that meet the participants' needs and interests, as well as the needs and interests of others
who are affected by the dispute.” OMITTED2.4: Set out potential benefits of mediation, eg it may assist the participants
“to communicate and exchange relevant information”, “invite the clarification of issues”, “provide opportunities for
understanding” and so on. Most of this content has been incorporated into s 2.2 of the new PS. However, there is one
important exception. Section 2.4(g) which provided that mediation may “promote a focus on the interests and needs of
those who may be subject to, or affected by, the situation and proposed options” has been OMITTED.
2.5: “Mediators do not advise upon, evaluate or determine disputes. They assist in managing the process of dispute
and conflict resolution whereby the participants agree upon the outcomes, when appropriate. Mediation is essentially
a process that maximises the self determination of the participants. The principle of self-determination requires that
mediation processes be non-directive as to content.” OMITTED2.6: It provided that the giving of “expert information”
by the mediator would not infringe upon participant self-determination and was consistent with the mediation process,
provided the information was “couched in general and non-prescriptive terms” and was presented at a time when it could
be integrated into the participants' decision making. OMITTED
2.7: In certain circumstances, mediators might use a “blended process” model of mediation “whereby they provide
advice” (so long as it was requested by the parties and also “given in a manner that enhances the principle of self-
determination”).
Commentary: s 2 The mediation process
New PS s 2.1
Section 2.1 of the new PS repeats the information given in Part I about the role of a mediator. The reference to
“knowledge, skills and ethical principles” and the cross-reference to s 10.1 are unnecessary complications from the
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 7
perspective of a lay person. A better alternative might be to state that: “A mediator assists participants to make their own
decisions in relation to disputes, conflicts or differences among them”.
116
New PS s 2.2
Section 2.2 provides a definition of mediation. 17 At least one author maintains that the opening words of s 2.2 represent
a change of focus in the Standards, from mediator “neutrality” as an ethical framework for mediation, to one based on
participant self-determination. 18 There is no doubt that the word “neutrality” has been deleted from the list of ethical
competences or understandings required by a mediator (see s 10.1(c)) and that participant “self-determination” is now an
explicit part of the definition of mediation in s 2.2. While there is some debate over the values that underpin mediation,
there is wide agreement that “self-determination” is its central value. 19 Consequently, both of these revisions improve the
PS (the current thinking in relation to neutrality is discussed later in connection with s 10.1). But it is important to note
that a focus on self-determination as a value of mediation, perhaps even the central value, is not new. There were multiple
provisions in the old PS which emphasised the value of self-determination (see, eg ss 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 9.7, 9.8 and 10.1).
There is a potential problem with the remaining parts of the definition of mediation in s 2.2. It describes only one model
of mediation (ie a facilitative model) 20 when several other models have been identified in the literature. For example,
Boulle identifies four paradigm models – the settlement, facilitative, therapeutic and evaluative models 21 (but he is at
pains to point out that these models are not distinct alternatives to one another). 22 The definition in s 2 is based on twin
assumptions: first, that facilitative interest-based mediation is, if not the single correct model of mediation, then at least the
more ethical model; 23 and second, that all mediators use this model (and if they do not, then they should be encouraged to
do so). Both of these assumptions are flawed. As to the first, the fact that different models have been identified highlights
the lack of consensus by mediation practitioners and scholars over the “correct” model/s, and associated objectives, values
and practices. No one model of mediation is more ethical than another. As to the second assumption, research suggests that
the majority of mediators use more than one approach in a single mediation and sometimes, even in a single meeting with
the parties. 24 Few mediators use an approach which is purely facilitative.
When the definition of mediation as it stands in s 2.2 is read in conjunction with the application section in Part 1, it
appears that the Standards only apply when a mediator uses a facilitative model (or alternatively, when he or she uses a
recognised hybrid model, eg legal aid conferencing, or a blended model as contemplated under s 10.2 of the PS). Given
the reality of practice, many mediations will not be covered by the definition in s 2 – in other words, the Standards appear
to be extremely limited in their application. They may not apply to mediators (and participants) who use more than one
approach, or to mediators who are settlement-oriented and rights-based in their approach; or to those mediators who favour
transformative mediation. (It is worth remembering that the parties may determine which approach is used and they may
resist all attempts by the mediator to turn them from a rights-based approach to an interest-based one.) This uncertainty did
not arise under the old PS.
117
The relevant section of the old PS (ie the first sentence of s 1.1) was general in its approach to the application of the
Standards – it did not target a specific model of mediation. The old PS purported to apply to “any mediator acting as a third
party to support two or more individuals or entities to manage, settle or resolve disputes, or to form a future plan of action
through a process of mediation and who voluntarily decides to become accredited” under this Scheme. This section of the
old PS allowed for the diversity of mediation practice to a far greater extent than is the case under the new PS.
Although the new definition of mediation in s 2.2 highlights “self-determination”, it does not explain what the term means
(neither was there a full explanation of the concept in the old PS, although ss 2.5 and 2.6 were on point). More information
on this concept could be given in the PS. For more clarification on the meaning of self-determination, it is necessary to
draw on the work of various scholars (see the explanations given in relation to s 7.4 of the old PS).
Provisions omitted from old PS s 2
Section 2.1 of the old PS had other positive features:
• It stopped short of describing mediation as an interest-based process. This better allowed for diversity in mediation
practice.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 8
• It allowed for the fact that mediation might be used to make “decisions about future actions and outcomes”. This
reference has been omitted from the new PS. As discussed above, mediation is not just a dispute resolution process
and this should be reflected in the Standards.
118
Section 2.2 of the old PS has been omitted from s 2 of the new PS. Consideration should be given to replacing it. All
participants need to understand:
(1) What mediation is not, eg it is not counselling.
(2) That mediation is not appropriate for all disputes or for all disputants. The reference to suitability in s 3.2(a)
of the new PS is not sufficient.
Section 2.3 of the old PS has also been omitted. At least three points have been lost as a result. First, participants can
negotiate about what they want to achieve out of mediation; second, the goal of mediation need not be to reach a final
agreement about a dispute (eg the parties might agree to a pattern of communication for the future), and three, the
participants might give consideration to the interests of third parties. Ultimately, the omission of this section may decrease
the parties' sense of self-determination. Consideration should be given to reintroducing the section.
Disappointingly, there is less emphasis in the new PS on protecting the interests of others affected by the outcome of
mediation with the omission of ss 2.3 and 2.4(g) of the old PS. There is some provision for the protection of “vulnerable
stakeholders” in s 8.4 of the new PS, but it is suggested that this is insufficient.
Two sentences from s 2.5 of the old PS have been omitted from the new PS. Each sentence is important and should have
been retained. The first sentence states that “[m]ediation is essentially a process that maximises the self determination of
the participants”. It emphasised in the clearest possible terms that self-determination is, if not the central value, then at least
one of the central values of mediation. The second sentence to be omitted stated that “the principle of self-determination
requires that mediation processes be non-directive as to content”. This sentence was intended, primarily, for the education
of mediators. Today we recognise that most process interventions also have an impact on the outcome of mediation, but
this sentence reminded mediators that they should, as humanly as possible, refrain from adopting techniques which direct
the parties towards particular outcomes. There is value in adding these sentences back into the PS.
Section 2.6 of the old PS recognised that parties must be fully informed about a range of matters before they can truly
make their own decisions (self-determine) and it permitted a mediator to give the parties expert information provided it
was couched in general and non-prescriptive terms and was given at a time which enabled the parties to integrate it into
their decision-making. A mediator could not give specific and prescriptive advice unless acknowledging that he or she was
using a blended model as provided for in s 2.7 of the old PS. These provisions were reinforced by the terms of s 10.1 of the
old PS. Under the new PS, mediators are no longer allowed to give the parties “general and non-prescriptive” information.
They may give advice providing the terms of s 10.2 are fulfilled.
119
New PS
3 Conducting mediation: Preliminary conference or intake
3.1: A mediator must, in a preliminary conference or intake session, ensure that participants are provided with: “(a)
a description of mediation and the steps involved including the use of joint sessions, separate sessions and shuttle
negotiations; (b) information on how to provide feedback or lodge a formal complaint in relation to the mediator” (cf
statement of principle for s 3, and ss 3.2, 3.4 and 6 of the old PS).
3.2: Sets out tasks which might be undertaken in the preliminary conference or intake session including: (a) “assessing
whether mediation is suitable”; (b) “explaining to participants the nature and content of any agreement or requirement to
enter into mediation including confidentiality, costs and how they are to be paid”; (c) identifying who is participating; (f)
referring participants to other sources of information, advice or support; and (g) informing “participants about their roles
and those of advisors, support persons, interpreters and any other attendees” (cf ss 3.3 and 3.4 of the old PS).
As was the case under the old PS, someone other than the mediator may conduct the preliminary conference or intake
session (s 3.1) (cf s 3.2 of the old PS).
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 9
Old PS
3 Starting a mediation process
Statement of principle: “Before mediating, a mediator should ensure that an outline of the mediation process has been
given to the participants”. This statement has been subsumed within the provisions of s 3.1 of the new PS.
3.1: “The diversity in mediation practice means that there are considerable differences in terms of how participants
enter into a mediation process”. OMITTED3.2: “Prior to the mediation taking place, the mediator will ensure that the
participants have been provided with an explanation of the process and have had an opportunity to reach agreement about
the way in which the process is to be conducted”. OMITTED.3.3: Sets out some of the possible objectives of an intake
process, such as: (a) determining whether mediation is appropriate; (b) assisting participants to prepare for the process;
(c) ensuring that every participant receives information about the roles of each party in the mediation; and (g) settling
venue and timing issues.3.4: Listed things that the mediator should do in intake or during the mediation including: (a)
“describe and explain the mediation process that is to be used”; (b) discuss the appropriateness of the process, its benefits
and risks, in the light of the participants' particular circumstances; (c) “discuss the confidentiality of the mediation and
any limitations on such confidentiality”; (f) explain indemnity provisions contained in any agreement to mediate; (g)
advise participants of the mediator's role in relation to the provision of advice or other services; and (h)(ii) advise “how
participants may seek information and advice from a variety of sources during the process”. The underlined provisions
have been OMITTED.
3.5: Encouraged the participants to enter into a written mediation agreement. It also encouraged the mediator to record, in
writing, the participants' understanding and agreement with respect to entry into mediation and confidentiality (or waiver
of confidentiality). It applied whether mediation came about by private agreement or pursuant to legislation. The section
has been OMITTED.
3.6: Instructed mediators to provide a copy of the Standards to the participants (or at least, to advise them how they could
get a copy). OMITTED
120
Commentary: s 3 Conducting mediation: Preliminary conference or intake
New PS s 3.1
Section 3.1(a) of the new PS takes up most of the statement of principle from s 3 of the old PS: mediators have to give the
participants a description of the mediation process and the steps involved. No guidance is given as to how detailed this
information should be, so this decision will be left to individual mediators.
Under s 3.1(b) of the new PS, mediators also have to advise participants about how to make a formal complaint “in relation
to the mediator”. It might be prudent to expand this provision so that participants are also made aware of how to make a
complaint in relation to the relevant mediation organisation or body (eg Relationships Australia or the AAT).
New PS s 3.2
Section 3.2 of the new PS is in similar terms to, and covers all major issues from, s 3.3 of the old PS. It sets out the
objectives of, and a list of matters to be undertaken in, a preliminary conference or intake session. However, as discussed
below, many provisions from s 3 of the old PS have been omitted.
Under the old PS, mediators were required to inform the participants of how to access the Standards (see s 3.6 of the
old PS). Under the new PS, participants must be advised “about the NMAS and how it can be accessed” (s 3.2(d)). It
appears that it is then left up to the participants to find their way to the Standards. The provision would benefit from a clear
statement instructing mediators to provide participants with a copy of the Standards. In this respect, the old PS is better –
participants must be helped to get access to these Standards (compare s 3.2(d) of the new PS with s 3.6 of the old PS).
Other provisions omitted from old PS s 3
A number of other important provisions from s 3 of the old PS have been omitted. They are discussed in turn below.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 10
The first sentence of s 3.1 of the old PS, which emphasised the diversity of mediation practice and the variety of ways in
which mediation might come about, has been omitted. This is useful information for participants.
Under s 3.2 of the old PS, participants had to be given an opportunity to agree about the way in which the mediation was
conducted. This might extend to agreeing on procedural rules and the format of mediation (eg as to whether joint and
separate sessions were used, or whether it should proceed as a shuttle mediation). This provision has been OMITTED. The
participants have lost an opportunity to have input into the process.
The new PS do not contain any provisions equivalent to s 3.4 of the old PS and as a result, several important provisions
have been lost. They are:
1. Section 3.4 required the mediator to “describe and explain the mediation process that is to be used”. This
sounds as though the mediator had to explain his or her own particular approach rather than providing a
general “description of mediation and the steps involved” (s 3.1(a) of the new PS).
2. The mediator had to discuss the appropriateness of mediation, its benefits and risks, and the alternatives
open to the particular participants in the particular circumstances. Again, this is more context specific than s
3.2(a) of the new PS.
3. Perhaps most important of all, s 3.4(c) of the old PS has not been reproduced in the new PS. This provision,
which relates to confidentiality, is discussed further below.
4. Mediators were required to “advise participants of the mediator's role in relation to the provision of advice
or other services” (eg a mediator might say, “although I am a lawyer, my role is not to give you legal
advice”).
121
Many mediators will be trained to deal with these matters as part of their opening statement and they will do so
instinctively. However, this may not be the case with new mediators (or for some “old” mediators).
The new PS do not have a provision equivalent to s 3.5 of the old PS. Section 3.5 encouraged the participants to reduce
their agreement to mediate and their agreement regarding confidentiality (or its waiver) to writing. This is a matter of
good practice and it is difficult to understand why the provision has been omitted. It is not enough simply to explain to
participants the nature and content of such agreements should they happen to have entered into them (see s 3.2(b) of the
new PS).
New PS
4 Conducting mediation: The mediation meeting
4.1: According to this provision, the mediation meeting will ordinarily include a joint session “in which the participants
communicate directly with each other”; it may also include separate sessions and shuttle negotiations.
4.2: The mediation may be conducted over multiple meetings.
4.3: The mediation may conclude whether or not an agreement is reached.
Commentary: s 4 Conducting mediation: The mediation meeting
New PS s 4
The old PS did not have a section headed “conducting the mediation meeting”. There was information provided about the
procedural aspects and stages of mediation (eg in s 3.4(h), which talked about separate sessions, and s 9 which concerned
procedural fairness), but the PS have been improved with the creation of a separate and discrete section on this stage of the
mediation.
The assumption underlying s 4 of the new PS is that the participants have been given more detailed information as required
under s 3.1(a) of the new PS. If this has not already occurred, then s 4 may cause participants some concerns. They are
not likely to be familiar with the terms “separate sessions” and “shuttle negotiations”, unless they have used mediation
before. The terms are not defined either in s 3.1(a) or s 4 of the new PS. Even the expression “joint session” may cause
some concern, especially if hostile parties (or an easily intimidated party) are under the impression that they have to
talk directly to each other. These terms need to be defined and described in such a way that the parties have a good idea
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 11
of what “usually” transpires in the various sessions (the old PS did not deal with these concepts either). Of course, it is
difficult to pin down the “usual” practises in mediation. The wording of s 3.4(h) of the old PS is helpful. It provided that
the mediator should “discuss with or inform the participants about the procedures and practices in the mediation, such as:
(i) the circumstances under which separate sessions may be held”. This allows for the possibility that no separate sessions
will be held or at the other extreme, that the entire mediation will be conducted as a shuttle mediation.
122
New PS
5 Conducting mediation: Suspending or terminating
5.1: “A mediator may suspend or terminate the mediation if they form the view that mediation is no longer suitable
or productive”, eg where a participant: (a) “is unable or unwilling to participate or continue in the mediation”; (b) “is
misusing the mediation”; or (c) is “not engaging in the mediation in good faith”. It may also be suspended if (d) “the safety
of one or more participants may be at risk”.
5.2: Mediators should advise of their intention to suspend or terminate.
5.3: Mediators should encourage the participants to consider alternative dispute resolution procedures.
Old PS
11 Termination of the mediation process
Statement of principle: “The mediator may suspend or terminate a mediation process if continuation of the process might
harm or prejudice one or more of the participants”. Although the word “prejudice” no longer appears, the terms of s 5 of
the new PS are wide enough to cover this situation, as well as the other circumstances contemplated by this statement of
principle.11.1: “Mediators should be alert to situations where parties or their advisers seek to misuse the mediation process
to achieve other ends” such as delaying or prolonging litigation, or where the mediator is of the opinion that one or more of
the participants is “acting in bad faith”. OMITTED
11.2: This was a general provision under which a mediator could suspend or terminate the process if the process was, in
the mediator's opinion, being used “for a purpose other than a mutual attempt to arrive at resolution or its usefulness has in
some other way been exhausted” (OMITTED) where possible a mediator should provide reasonable notice to participants
of their intention to suspend or terminate.
11.3: “The mediator may withdraw from the mediation process when any agreement is being reached by the participants
that the mediator believes is unconscionable” (OMITTED). The section also provided that the mediator should assist the
parties to assess further process options in taking the matter forward. This provision is similar to s 5.3 of the new PS.
Commentary: s 5 Conducting mediation: Suspending or terminating
New PS s 5
Under the old PS, the topic of suspension or termination of the mediation was dealt with in s 11. Although there is some
difference in the wording, the essence of the statement of principle from s 11 and most of ss 11.1 and 11.2 of the old PS
have been retained in s 5.1 of the new PS. The terms of s 5.1 are sufficiently general to allow mediators to terminate
or suspend the mediation whenever they are of the view that continuation might “harm or prejudice one or more of the
participants”, or one or more of the participants is acting in bad faith or otherwise misusing the mediation or the usefulness
of mediation has been exhausted.
Section 5.1 does not tell mediators to be alert to situations where a participant seeks “to misuse the mediation process” (see
s 11.1) but this is surely a precursor to a mediator suspending or terminating the mediation under s 5.1 of the new PS.
123
Like the original, the new provision does not define the term “good faith” (or its absence, ie “bad faith”). Historically,
these terms have been difficult to define, although some common themes of what it means to act in good faith (or bad
faith) have been discerned. There appears to be wide agreement that good faith includes some preparation, attendance
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 12
at the mediation by someone with authority to settle, and some elements of participation such as “not summarily and
without consideration” 25 immediately rejecting what the other party has to say. Some guidance on behaviour which is
not inconsistent with good faith in mediation is also available from cases 26 and commentaries 27 from Australia and
overseas. Good faith does not require a party to act against self-interest and it does not require a party to take “any step
to advance the interests of the other party”. 28 It does not preclude a party from taking a strong position at the outset and
from being reluctant to make concessions. 29 Good faith does not require the parties to engage in total disclosure. 30 There
is no requirement to reveal all of one's interests, negotiation goals and bottom lines. A lawyer cannot, however, mislead
the mediator or his or her opponent about a material fact, for it is recognised that such action (or inaction, where a false
statement needs to be corrected) constitutes bad faith. 31
Bad faith behaviour also includes use of mediation “solely” to delay litigation (or to burden the opposing party) or to
secure discovery.32 Ultimately, decisions about whether or not a participant has acted in good faith or bad faith will turn
on a combination of factors set in the context of each individual case.There is one major difference between s 11 of the
old PS and s 5 of the new PS. Section 11.3 of the old PS allowed a mediator to withdraw when he or she believed any
agreement being reached was unconscionable. While this provision has been omitted from the new PS, the terms of s 5.1
of the new PS are wide enough to allow mediators to terminate the mediation if they are concerned on this point, for surely
the mediation would be “no longer suitable or productive” (emphasis added) in these circumstances.Under s 5.3 (and
previously s 11.3), the mediator can help the parties assess their dispute resolution options if the mediation does not end in
agreement.
124
New PS
6 Power and safety
6.1: “A mediator must be alert to changing balances of power in mediation and manage the mediation accordingly”.
6.2: “A mediator must consider the safety and comfort of participants”. The section then provides a list of interventions
that mediators may take, such as agreeing on behavioural guidelines, putting in place and activating security protocols,
using separate sessions or other communication technology, “having a participant's friend, representative or professional
advisor attend”, and suspending or terminating the mediation.
Old PS
4 Power issues
Statement of principle: “Mediators shall have completed training that assists them to recognise power imbalance and
issues related to control and intimidation and take appropriate steps to manage the mediation process accordingly.”
OMITTED4.1: “Some disputes may not be appropriate for mediation processes because of power imbalance, safety,
control and/or intimidation issues”. OMITTED
4.2: Set out various measures that mediators might take to ensure the safety of participants whenever “abuse is present, or
implied or threatened”. The measures are much the same as those now appearing in s 6.2 of the new PS.
Commentary: s 6 Power and safety
New PS s 6.1
In order to better understand s 6 of the new PS, regard must first be had to s 10 which sets out the knowledge and skills
required of mediators. According to s 10.1, mediators must be knowledgeable in the dynamics of power (s 10.1(a)(i))
and they must have the ability to manage high emotions and power imbalances (s 10.1(b)(vi)). These provisions are not
exhaustive. For example, mediators might also be trained to identify possible source/s of power imbalance.
Section 6.1 then comes into play. The section is deficient in two respects. First, the section should remind mediators
that not all disputes are appropriate for mediation because of issues relating to power and the safety of participants (the
statement which was included in s 4.1 of the old PS, which has been omitted, should be replaced). The majority of the
provisions in s 6 assume that mediation has commenced. The very first provision in s 6 should remind mediators that some
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 13
disputes are not appropriate for mediation because of power disparity and that mediation should not be commenced in
these cases.
Second, s 6.1 suggests that a mediator need only be alert to changing balances of power and not to pre-existing imbalances
of power. Mediators need to be alert to power disparity from the very beginning.
125
Section 6.2 is adequate. However, there are no strategies offered to deal with two very common sources of power
imbalance: 1) when one party has access to more/better information and advice; and 2) when one party has access to
greater financial resources (the two power sources will often overlap). Mediators can provide participants with information
about other services and resources but this is of limited use in many circumstances. They cannot provide missing
information themselves without jeopardising their impartiality. Ultimately, a mediator may have no choice but to suspend
or terminate the mediation.
Other provision omitted from old PS s 4
The statement of principle from s 4 of the old PS has been omitted. Since the training requirements (including training to
recognise and handle power imbalances) are canvassed in the separate NMAS Approval Standards, this omission does not
seem problematic.
New PS
7 Procedural fairness and impartiality
7.1: “A mediator must conduct the mediation in a fair, equitable and impartial way, without favouritism or bias in act or
omission” (cf statement of principle from ss 5, 5.1 and statement of principle from s 9 of the old PS).
7.2: “A mediator must identify and disclose any potential grounds of bias or conflict of interest before the mediation, or
that emerge at any time during the process” (emphasis added) (cf ss 5.1 and 5.2 of the old PS).
7.3: “A mediator must not mediate in cases involving a conflict of interest without the informed consent of the
participants”, and then only if the mediator believes that the conflict will not impair his or her impartial conduct of the
mediation (cf s 5.1 of the old PS).
7.4: “A mediator must support participants to reach agreements freely, voluntarily, without undue influence and on the
basis of informed consent” (cf s 9.1 of the old PS).
7.5: “A mediator must provide participants appropriate opportunities to speak to and be heard by one another in the
mediation, and to articulate their respective interests, issues and underlying needs” (cf s 9.2 of the old PS).
7.6: “A mediator must ensure, as far as practicable, that participants have had sufficient time and opportunity to access
sources of advice or information necessary for their decision-making” (cf s 9.5 of the old PS).
7.7: “A mediator must encourage and support negotiations that focus on the participants' respective interests, issues and
underlying needs and must encourage participants to assess any proposed agreements accordingly and with reference to
their long-term viability” (the closest point of comparison is ss 9.4 and 9.7 of the old PS).
126
Old PS
Section 7 of the new PS draws on ss 5 and 9 of the old PS.
5 Impartial and ethical practice
Statement of principle: “A mediator must conduct the dispute resolution process in an impartial manner and adhere to
ethical standards of practice”. Some of this provision has been taken up in s 7.1 of the new PS.5.1: Defined “impartiality”
to mean “freedom from favouritism or bias either in word or action, or the omission of word or action, that might give
the appearance of such favouritism or bias.” OMITTED but see s 7.1 of the new PS.Further s 5.1 required mediators to
disclose actual and potential grounds of bias and conflicts of interest. It also provided that mediators could continue the
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 14
mediation with “an informed waiver” by the parties and if the mediator was of the view that his or her impartiality was not
impaired (cf ss 7.2 - 7.3 of the new PS).
5.2: “A mediator should identify and disclose any potential grounds of bias or conflict of interest that emerge at any time in
the process”. They should take reasonable steps to minimise the chances of being in a position of potential bias or conflict.
If there is a potential conflict, mediators should disclose it as soon as possible and preferably before mediation commences.
OMITTED but see s 7.2 of the new PS.
5.3: “A mediator should avoid conflicts of interest, or potential grounds for bias or the perception of a conflict of interest,
in recommending the services of other professionals”. Where possible, the mediator should provide several alternatives if
recommending referrals to other practitioners and services (cf s 8.5 of the new PS). OMITTED
For discussion about ss 5.4 - 5.7 of the old PS, see the discussion on ss 8.2 - 8.3 of the new PS.
9 Procedural fairness
Statement of principle: “A mediator will conduct the mediation process in a procedurally fair manner”. OMITTED but see
s 7.1 of the new PS.
9.1: “A mediator will support the participants to reach any agreement freely, voluntarily, without undue influence, and on
the basis of informed consent” (cf s 7.4 of the new PS).
9.2: “The mediator will provide each participant with an opportunity to speak and to be heard in the mediation, and to
articulate his or her own needs, interests and concerns” (cf s 7.5 of the new PS).
9.3: This section dealt with the situation where a party was unable or unwilling to continue. A similar provision can be
found in s 5.1(a) of the new PS.
9.4: “The mediator should encourage and support balanced negotiations and should understand how manipulative or
intimidating negotiating tactics can be employed by participants”. OMITTED
9.5: The mediator must ensure participants “have sufficient time and opportunity to access sources of advice or
information” in certain circumstances such as where it appears that “a participant needs either additional information or
assistance” (see s 7.6 of the new PS).
For s 9.6, see ss 3.2(f) and 8.5 of the new PS.
9.7: “It is a fundamental principle of the mediation process that competent and informed participants can reach an
agreement which may differ from litigated outcomes. The mediator, however, has a duty to support the participants in
assessing the feasibility and practicality of any proposed agreement in both the long and short term, in accordance with
the participant's own subjective criteria of fairness, taking cultural differences and where appropriate, the interests of any
vulnerable stakeholders into account”. OMITTED although some elements are taken up in s 7.7 of the new PS.
9.8: “The primary responsibility for the resolution of a dispute rests with the participants. The mediator will not pressure
participants into an agreement or make a substantive decision on behalf of any participant”. OMITTED
127
Commentary: s 7 Procedural fairness and impartiality
New PS s 7.1
Mediators have long had a duty to conduct mediation in an impartial manner. 33 To meet this requirement, mediators
generally introduce themselves in an equal manner, perform equal non-verbals such as handshaking, address the parties in
a similar manner, sit an equal distance from each party, maintain equal eye contact, give each of the parties equal air time
and so on. If a mediator becomes aware that he or she is starting to dislike a party and/or that party's attitudes, to the extent
that it is interfering with the mediator's conduct of the mediation, most mediators would not continue with the mediation.
As a result of s 7.1 of the new PS, mediators now have an obligation to conduct mediation in a way which is also “fair” and
“equitable”. The concepts of fairness and equity are not new. The statement of principle from s 9 of the old PS required
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 15
mediators to conduct the mediation process in a procedurally fair manner. Additionally one of the competences required of
mediators under s 7.3(c) of the old PS was an ethical understanding in relation to (vi) “Supporting fairness and equity in
mediation”. A similar phrase has been retained in the list of ethical principles in s 10.1(c)(v) of the new PS.
Neither “fairness” nor “equity” have been defined in either the old or the new PS. It is suggested that the obligations
arising from s 7.1 relate to procedural aspects of mediation, and not to the outcome of mediation. Support for this
conclusion can be found in the statement of principle from s 5 and from the terms of s 5 of the old PS which relate to the
manner in which mediation is conducted; and from the heading and statement of principle from s 9 of the old PS – in fact
almost every sub-section of s 9 spoke to the mediator's responsibility to conduct mediation “in a procedurally fair manner”.
The same can be said of s 7 of the new PS: the section is headed “procedural fairness” (not outcome fairness), and the
obligations imposed by the section all relate to the manner in which mediation is conducted. 34 Mediators discharge their
obligations in relation to process fairness by, for example, ensuring that participants have an opportunity to speak and to be
heard; to obtain “independent professional advice or information” when needed; to take part in “balanced” negotiations in
which each participant has been treated in an even-handed and respectful manner.
There are some drafting problems in s 7.1. It incorporates only a partial definition of “impartial”, ie “without favouritism or
bias in act or omission”. Two elements are missing from the definition:
1. It does not include and thus prohibit bias by “word”, only bias by “action” (or omission).
2. It does not extend to “a perception of bias”.
Ideally these elements of the definition of “impartial” would be added to s 7.1.
128
New PS s 7.2
There is a gap in s 7.2. It only imposes on the mediator an obligation to disclose potential grounds of bias or conflict of
interest, and not actual grounds of bias or conflict. The drafters may have thought that: if potential for bias or conflict has
to be revealed and dealt with in accordance with the provision, then a situation of actual bias or conflict not sanctioned by
the parties, will not arise (this is the “nip it in the bud early” idea). This is an unrealistic assumption. There might be an
actual ground of bias or conflict in existence before the mediator ever has contact with the participants. The conflict might
come under s 7.3 (see below) but not the bias. This is a situation that could fall through the gap. The preferred alternative is
to amend s 7.2 to include actual biases and conflicts.
New PS s 7.3
Section 7.3 of the new PS is similar to s 5.1 of the old PS, setting out the circumstances in which a mediator can continue
to mediate, despite a bias or conflict, or a potential for one. At least, that seems to be the intention of the section. However,
it currently only addresses situations involving a conflict of interest. It should be expanded to also cover situations
involving a bias.
At present, s 7.2 does not cover actual grounds of bias or conflict, only potential ones; s 7.3 does not deal with situations of
bias, only with a conflict of interest. Neither section allows for perceptions of conflict or bias.
New PS s 7.4
Section 7.4 of the new PS is one of the most important provisions in the Standards. 35 It replaces s 9.1 of the old PS. The
old and new provisions (see s 9.1 and s 7.4 respectively) are almost identical except that “will” (old PS) has become a
“must” (new PS). This provision is now prescriptive in its format. It provides: “A mediator must support participants to
reach agreements freely, voluntarily, without undue influence and on the basis of informed consent”. Unfortunately, none
of the important terms in this provision are defined in either set of Standards. As mentioned earlier, the concept of self-
determination is not explained fully either. Resort might be had to the work of scholars such as Welch and Nolan-Haley to
fill the gaps. The essential elements of self-determination are: 36
• Active and direct participation by the parties in the process of communication and negotiation.
• Informed consent on the part of the parties as to both process and outcome. The parties must have sufficient
information (including information as to the available alternatives to an offered settlement) to make an informed
decision.
• V oluntariness by the parties in coming to a decision. (The idea that the parties must enter into mediation voluntarily
has long been dismissed).
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 16
• Absence of coercion on the parties in coming to a decision. The parties must retain the ability to accept or reject any
particular outcome. 37
New PS s 7.5
Again, s 7.5 of the new PS is almost identical to s 9.2 of the old PS except that the “will” has become a “must”.
Participants must be given “appropriate opportunities to speak to and be heard by one another” and to articulate their
needs, interests and issues. A mediator cannot guarantee that one participant will “hear” the other in the true sense of the
term but the mediator can create an environment and establish ground rules which will maximise the possibility of the
participants hearing, listening to and understanding each other. Mediators usually set three behavioural guidelines for the
conduct of mediation. These are that the parties do not interrupt each other, do not denigrate each other, and treat each
other in a respectful manner. 38 Most mediators will intervene to correct inappropriate behaviour on the part of participants
such as: attempting to cross-examine or interrogate their opponent; not allowing their opponent to speak freely; making
threats; or putting their opponent down, eg by name-calling.
129
New PS s 7.6
The provision in s 7.6 (and its equivalent in s 9.5 of the old PS) is laudable – a mediator must ensure that participants have
“sufficient time and opportunity” to access advice or information “necessary for their decision-making” (emphasis added).
This is a necessary part of ensuring informed consent by the parties. However, if a participant does not have the means,
ability, financial resources etc required to gain access to and understand the advice or information, that participant will not
be in a position to make a fully informed decision. Mediators will be faced with an ethical dilemma (one which should
be highlighted by the Standards): should they let a party enter into an agreement without all the necessary information
(thus putting at risk or undermining the value of self-determination) or provide them with the missing information (thus
compromising the value of impartiality)?
New PS s 7.7
Section 7.7 consists of two parts. First, it imposes on mediators an obligation to encourage and support interest-based
negotiation between the participants. There is, it is suggested, a procedural bias towards interest-based negotiations.
This bias is of long standing. 39 It is not problematic as long as mediators understand that there are other approaches
to negotiation and in fact, research suggests that positional or distributive negotiation exists to some extent in most
negotiations. 40 Mediators need to be trained in the theory and practices of both approaches; they must be skilled in
responding to both approaches.
The second part of s 7.7 of the new PS imposes an obligation on mediators to assist the participants to assess any proposed
agreement by reference to two criteria: (i) by how well it satisfies the interests, issues and needs of the participants; and (ii)
on the basis of long-term viability. There are other criteria which should be taken into account, as discussed next.
Provisions omitted from old PS ss 5 and 9
There are some provisions from s 5.2 of the old PS, such as the requirement to minimise the risk of bias or conflict
occurring, which ideally should be included in the Standards.
There are, it is suggested, three other omissions from section 7:
1. As mentioned earlier, the opening sentence of s 9.7 of the old PS is critical. It states: “It is a fundamental
principle of the mediation process that competent and informed participants can reach an agreement
which may differ from litigated outcomes”. It is the essence of mediation in many ways and reflects
important mediation values: self-determination, autonomy, informed consent, the potential for participants
in mediation to arrive at decisions that may be different from court outcomes.
130
2. Section 9.7 of the old PS mentioned several other criteria for assessing proposed agreements: short term
viability; “the participant's own subjective criteria of fairness”, taking into account cultural differences;
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 17
and the interests of vulnerable stakeholders. These are important criteria for assessing durability, outcome
fairness and what Fisher and Ury called a “wise agreement”, ie one which takes community standards into
account. 41 These criteria should be included in the PS.
3. The third omission is from s 9.4 of the old PS. It imposed on mediators an obligation to “encourage and
support balanced negotiations”. This sentence has been omitted from the new PS. While the expression
“balanced negotiations” is open to debate, it is the mediator's role to create an environment conducive to
structured negotiations in which each participant has an equal opportunity to express their concerns and
issues, to voice their ideas (or options) for resolution of the dispute, and to participate in the give and take of
negotiations. Section 7.5 of the new PS goes part-way to articulating the mediator's responsibilities in regard
to negotiations, as does s 7.7. However, s 7 could be improved by adding to s 7.5 or s 7.7 those portions of
ss 9.4 and 9.7 of the old PS.
Section 9.8 of the old PS is also an important provision which has been almost entirely omitted from the new PS. Sections
9.7 and 9.8 not only raise several values of mediation (eg self-determination and outcome fairness), they also speak to
the relationship between those values. Self-determination is the central value underpinning mediation, and participants,
providing they are fully informed, are free to arrive at a decision which is different from the decision a judge may have
imposed.
131
New PS
8 Ethical conduct and professional relations
8.1: “A mediator must mediate only where they have the competence to do so” (emphasis added) (cf s 7.3 of the old
PS).8.2: “A mediator must not use information obtained in mediation for personal gain or advantage” (cf s 5.4 of the old
PS).8.3: “A mediator must adhere to the ethical code or standards prescribed by the professional organisation or association
of which they are a member or by whom they are employed” (cf s 5.7 of the old PS).8.4: “A mediator should encourage
participants to consider the interests of any vulnerable stakeholders”.8.5: “A mediator should encourage participants
to obtain other professional support when appropriate but should refrain from recommending the services of particular
individuals or firms” (see ss 5.3 and 9.6 of the old PS).8.6: “A mediator may liaise with other relevant professionals with
permission from the relevant participant” (see s 6.6 of the old PS, which deals with confidentiality and its exceptions).8.7:
“A mediator should extend professional courtesy to other professionals engaged by the participants” (see s 8 of the old
PS).8.8: “A mediator should, where possible, engage in professional debriefing, peer consultation and mentoring of less
experienced mediators” (cf ss 7.1 and 7.2 of the old PS).
Old PS
Section 8 of the new PS draws on ss 5-9 of the old PS.
5 Impartial and ethical practice
5.1: Mediators must avoid a conflict of interest or possible bias in recommending the services of other professionals.
Where possible, the mediator should provide several alternatives (see ss 3.2(f) and 8.5 of the new PS).
5.2: Prohibited a mediator from using information “about participants” for personal gain (see s 8.2 of the new PS).
5.3: Provided that “mediators should adhere to … the code of conduct or ethical standards prescribed by the organisation of
which they are members” (see s 8.3 of the new PS).
7 Competence
Statement of principle: “Mediators must be competent and have relevant skills and knowledge”. Although the statement of
principle has been omitted, its content has been incorporated into ss 8.1 and 10.1 of the new PS.
7.1 and 7.2: The essence of these two sections, which deal with debriefing and continuing professional development, has
been amalgamated into s 8.8 of the new PS.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 18
7.3: “Mediators should be competent and have the capacity to apply knowledge, skills and an ethical understanding and
commitment in the areas listed below” (cf ss 8.1 and 10.1 of the new PS).
132
8 Inter-professional relations
Statement of principle: “Mediators should respect the relationships with professional advisers, other mediators and experts
which complement their practice of mediation”. OMITTED
8.1: Mediators should “promote cooperation with other professionals and encourage clients to use other professional
resources when appropriate” (cf 8.7 of the new PS). The underlined portion has been OMITTED.8.2: This section
contemplated the situation where there was more than one dispute resolution process being used for a particular dispute
and encouraged mediators to keep themselves informed and to inform other professionals about the processes taking place.
9 Procedural fairness
9.6: This section provided that participants should be encouraged “to obtain independent professional advice or
information” where appropriate but, in accordance with s 5.3, the mediator should provide several alternatives in
recommending referrals to avoid a conflict of interest or bias or the potential for such (cf ss 3.2(f) and 8.5 of the new PS).
Commentary: s 8 Ethical conduct and professional relations
New PS s 8
Section 8 of the new PS is somewhat of a grab-bag of provisions taken from ss 5-9 of the old PS.
New PS s 8.1
Mediators owe the participants a duty of competence. A “duty of competence” may be defined in a general way as a duty
to apply and integrate knowledge, skills, values and attitudes in such a way as to effectively perform the tasks required of a
mediator. 42
New PS s 8.2
The wording of s 8.2 of the new PS (prohibiting use of information obtained in mediation for personal gain) is wider than
that used in s 5.4 of the old PS (prohibiting use of information “about participants”) and is to be preferred.
New PS s 8.3
Many mediators are members of a primary profession, eg they are lawyers, social workers, counsellors, engineers and
so on. Section 8.3 (and s 5.7 of the old PS) means, for example, that a lawyer mediator must comply with the solicitors'
or barristers' rules of professional conduct, as relevant. It suggests that those professional conduct rules are to prevail in
the event of conflict with the PS (how else can the lawyer “adhere” to them) but it would be preferable if s 8.3 made this
explicit. 43
New PS s 8.4
Section 8.4 of the new PS provides a rare mention of the interests of other stakeholders. Some commentators argue that
more weight should be given to the interests of persons who are not parties to the mediation but are nonetheless affected by
its outcome. 44 There is no consensus on this matter at the current time, although some insights can be gained from relevant
literature. 45
133
New PS s 8.5
Some commentators have expressed concern over s 8.5 of the new PS for it appears to preclude a mediator from making
any recommendations about the use of other named service providers. Section 5.3 of the old PS allowed mediators to
recommend specific service providers so long as several alternatives were given. One might argue that if the mediator
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 19
gives the participants a list of several service providers, he or she is not actually recommending “the services of particular
individuals or firms” such that the practice permitted under s 5.3 could continue under the new s 8.5. However, it would be
preferable if the matter was clarified.
New PS s 8.6
The closest provision to s 8.6 of the new PS is that of s 6.6 of the old PS which enabled the mediator, with the participants'
consent, to discuss the mediation process with the participants' lawyers and other expert advisers where those advisers
had not attended the mediation. Clearly this provision has implications for the confidentiality of the mediation – hence its
location under the provisions on confidentiality in the old PS. The language of the new provision is a little vague, eg what
does “liaise” mean? What can the mediator “liaise” about? These gaps could be filled in by the drafters.
New PS s 8.7
The old PS had a separate section dealing with “Inter-professional relations” (s 8). Section 8.1 was very general, providing
that mediators “should promote cooperation with other professionals”. The term “cooperation” was not defined and
its meaning is debatable. Some common threads of what it means to cooperate can be gleaned from legislation which
now regulates the pre-action conduct of the parties and their advisers. For instance, s 4 of the Civil Dispute Resolution
Act 2011 (Cth) provides examples of steps “that could be taken by a person as part of taking genuine steps to resolve a
dispute”. 46 They include notifying the other person of the issues that are, or may be, in dispute and offering to discuss
them, with a view to resolving the dispute; providing relevant information and documents to the other person; agreeing
on a particular person to facilitate the process; attending the process, and attempting to negotiate. Whatever the term
meant, it was a duty which extended to, eg judicial registrars and court/tribunal staff, all of whom might be regarded as
“professionals”.
The duty imposed by s 8.7 of the new PS, that of “professional courtesy”, only applies to “professionals engaged by the
participants”. It is a limited duty and it applies to a very limited group of persons. Courtesy is not defined in the PS but it is
not a new concept for lawyers who owe duties of fairness and courtesy to everyone with whom they engage in the course
of legal practice. 47 It may be that the courts would treat the concept as one which depended on the specific circumstances
of each case. 48 In the future, this area (ie relationships with other professionals), should be extended, eg to cover court and
tribunal staff, and some idea of what “courtesy” might entail could be added.
134
New PS
9 Confidentiality
9.1: “A mediator must respect the agreed confidentiality arrangements relating to participants and to information provided
during the mediation, except:”
(a) “with the consent of the participant” to whom the duty is owed; or
(b) where the information, which will be non-identifying, is required for research, supervisory or educational
purposes; or
(c) “when required to do otherwise by law”;
(d) where “permitted to do otherwise by ethical guidelines or obligations”;
(e) where “reasonably considered necessary to do otherwise to prevent an actual or potential threat to human
life or safety” (cf s 6.1 of the old PS).
9.2: Before holding separate sessions, the mediator “must inform participants of the confidentiality which applies to these
sessions” (cf s 6.4 of the old PS).
9.3: This section enables the mediator to discuss the mediation and any proposed agreement with a participant's advisors or
with third parties, with the participant's consent (cf ss 6.6 and 6.7 of the old PS).
9.4: Mediators are not required to retain documentation from the mediation (cf s 6.8 of the old PS).
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 20
9.5: Mediators must take care to preserve confidentiality when storing and disposing of documents used or created at the
mediation (cf 6.8 of the old PS).
Old PS
6 Confidentiality
Statement of principle: “A mediator should respect the confidentiality of the participants”. OMITTED 6.1: “A mediator
shall not voluntarily disclose to anyone who is not a party to the mediation any information obtained except” … in four
specified circumstances (which are much the same as those provided in s 9.1 of the new PS), including: “(d) where
permitted by existing ethical guidelines or requirements and the information discloses an actual or potential threat to
human life or safety” (emphasis added) (cf s 9.1 of the new PS). The underlined portion has been omitted.6.2: Mediators
had to clarify “the participants' expectations of confidentiality” before the mediation process commenced. OMITTED
from s 9 but see s 3.2(b) of the new PS. The section also provided that any written mediation agreement should include
provisions concerning confidentiality. OMITTED
6.3: Mediators had to inform participants of the limitations of confidentiality before the mediation commenced (the
Standard recognised that the limitations might be statutory, judicially or ethically mandated). OMITTED
6.4: If the mediator held separate sessions with a participant, the obligations of confidentiality regarding these sessions had
to be discussed and agreed upon before the sessions commenced (cf s 9.2 of the new PS). OMITTED
6.5: The essence of this provision was that mediators should not give evidence without an order of the court or tribunal
if the mediator reasonably believed that doing so would violate an obligation of confidentiality (and should inform
participants of the situation as soon as practicable). OMITTED
6.6: Enabled mediators to discuss the mediation process with the participants' advisers with the participants' consent (cf s
9.3 of the new PS).
6.7: Enabled mediators to disclose the substance of any proposed agreement with the participants' respective advisers with
the permission of the participants (see s 9.3 of the new PS).
6.8: Mediators had to maintain confidentiality in storing and disposing of records of the mediation. Mediators were not
required to retain documents (see ss 9.4 and 9.5 of the new PS).
135
Commentary: 9 Confidentiality
New PS s 9
There are two aspects to confidentiality in mediation, the duty owed by the parties to each other and the duty owed by the
mediator to the parties. In each case, the duty may arise by virtue of an agreement to mediate, or a separate confidentiality
agreement, and/or by legislation (see eg the obligations imposed by ss 53 – 54 of Civil Proceedings Act 2011 (Qld)). The
PS can only directly address the duty owed by the mediator to the parties (a duty of confidentiality as between the parties
cannot be imposed by the Standards). Section 6.1 of the old PS did impose a duty of confidentiality on the mediator,
prohibiting voluntary disclosure by the mediator of any information obtained in connection with the mediation except in
four instances. This provision should have been retained in the new PS.
There is a significant shift in the new PS – s 9.1 does not impose a duty of confidentiality on the mediator but rather,
imposes on the mediator a duty to “respect the agreed confidentiality arrangements” entered into by the parties. It does
not, of itself, impose a duty of confidentiality on the mediator. And in fact the provisions in s 9 assume a pre-existing
confidentiality agreement between the parties. It is natural then to expect that the mediator might have a duty to encourage
the parties to agree on this issue at a preliminary conference if they have not already done so. Unfortunately this is not the
case. Section 3.2(b) also assumes a pre-existing mediation and confidentiality agreement. If there is an agreement, s 9.1
imposes a duty on the mediator to respect it.
As to the exceptions to confidentiality, the new PS has wisely separated s 6.1(d) into two grounds of exception to
confidentiality (cf ss 9.1(d) and (e)). However, there is a drafting problem with the list of exceptions to confidentiality.
The first three (in s 9.1(a), 9.1(b) and 9.1(c)) are connected by the word “or” so that they may be considered separate
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 21
circumstances where the requirements of confidentiality can be waived, but the last three exceptions (in 9.1(c), 9.1(d) and
9.1(e)) are not connected at all either by the word “or” or the word “and” so that it is difficult to determine whether they are
to be considered separate grounds. It is likely that they are intended as discrete grounds but the matter needs to be clarified.
There is another potentially serious gap that has opened up in the new provisions regarding confidentiality. Sections
6.2 and 6.3 of the old PS have been omitted. These sections imposed on mediators a duty to clarify the participants'
expectations of confidentiality and to inform them about the limitations of confidentiality. Under the new PS, someone –
who need not be the mediator – must explain to the parties during an intake session or preliminary conference “the nature
and content of any agreement or requirement to enter into mediation including confidentiality, costs and how they are to
be paid” (s 3.2(b) of the new PS). There is no mention of exceptions to confidentiality at this point. The person conducting
the intake or preliminary session may not mention the exceptions, a state of affairs which may be unknown to the mediator.
The mediator no longer has an obligation to inform the participants about confidentiality (and its exceptions) before or
during the mediation process – other than to inform them about the confidentiality that applies if separate sessions are held
(s 9.2).
There is another minor change of note: s 6.4 of the old PS appeared to give participants the opportunity to discuss and
agree upon the obligation of confidentiality attached to separate sessions. Section 9.2 of the new PS appears to give the
mediator the power to decide on the issue. It is possible that a mediator might say “nothing will be confidential unless
you tell me it is to be treated as confidential” or “the only thing that is confidential is this …” Given that one of the stated
objectives of the PS is to achieve some level of consistency, it might have been better to regard everything said or done in a
separate session as confidential subject to specified exceptions.
136
New PS
10 Knowledge, skills and ethical principles
10.1: A mediator, consistent with the Approval Standards, must have the knowledge and skills, and an understanding of the
ethical principles, outlined below.
Three separate lists are given, the first for knowledge, the second for skills and the third for ethical principles. The
expression “including, but not limited to” is not used at the beginning of the lists (as it was in s 7.3 of the old PS).
The areas of knowledge listed in s 10.1(a) are much the same as those listed in s 7.3(a). Of note, item (x) has been changed
such that mediators are now required to have knowledge about “the law relevant to mediators and to the mediation
process” (cf s 7.3(a)(x) which required mediators to have knowledge relating to: “The law of mediation on confidentiality,
enforceability of mediated agreements and liability of mediators”). The terms of the new provision are wider.
There have been some changes to the list of skills. Some have disappeared from the Standards, eg s 7.3(b)(vi) “Mediator
interventions appropriate for standard difficulties in mediation” has been OMITTED. Others have been added, see eg
s 10.1(b)(viii) “reality-testing proposed outcomes in light of participants' interests, issues, underlying needs and long-
term viability”.10.1(c): lists the “ethical principles” with respect to which a mediator must have an “understanding”. The
following are listed:
(i) competence, integrity and accountability
(ii) professional conduct
(iii) self-determination
(iv) informed consent
(v) safety, procedural fairness and equity in mediation including withdrawing from or terminating the mediation
process
(vi) impartiality including the avoidance of conflicts of interest
(vii) confidentiality privacy and reporting obligations
(viii) honesty in the marketing and advertising of mediation and promotion of the mediator's practice.
10.2: Where a mediator uses a blended process such as advisory or evaluative mediation or conciliation, which involves the
provision of advice (emphasis added), the mediator must: obtain the consent of the participants; ensure that he or she has
current knowledge and experience; hold relevant professional registration and indemnity insurance; and “ensure that the
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 22
advice is provided in a manner that maintains and respects the principle of self-determination” (s 10.2(c) of the new PS, cf
s 10.5 of the old PS).
137
Old PS
Section 10 of the new PS draws on ss 7 and 10 of the old PS.
7 Competence
Statement of principle: “Mediators must be competent and have relevant skills and knowledge”. This wording has been
absorbed into ss 8.1 and 10.1 of the new PS.
As to the provisions in ss 7.1-7.2, see s 8.8 of the new PS.
7.3: “Mediators should be competent and have the capacity to apply knowledge, skills and an ethical understanding
and commitment in the areas listed below. Mediators demonstrate competence by showing that they have the requisite
knowledge and skills and can apply them”. The section goes on to say that mediators are required to ensure “ongoing
professional development is focused on achieving and maintaining competencies including (a) KNOWLEDGE in areas
including, but not limited to … (b) SKILLS, including, but not limited to: … and (c) ETHICAL UNDERSTANDINGS in
relation to …”The underlined portions have been OMITTED from s 7.3 of the old PS.Three separate lists were then given,
dealing in turn with knowledge, skills, and ethical understandings. As mentioned above, there have been some minor
changes in the lists of knowledge and skills. Section 7.3(c) provided that mediators should have an ethical understanding in
relation to:
(i) The avoidance of conflicts of interest.
(ii) Marketing and advertising of mediation.
(iii) Confidentiality, privacy and reporting obligations.
(iv) Neutrality and impartiality.
(v) Fiduciary obligations.
(vi) Supporting fairness and equity in mediation.
(vii) Withdrawal from and termination of the mediation process.
Section 10 Information provided by the mediator
Statement of principle: “The mediator has no advisory or determinative role in regard to the content of the matter being
mediated or its outcome. The mediator can advise upon and determine the mediation process that is used.” OMITTED
although the proviso to s 2.2 picks up on some of these points.10.1: “Consistent with the standards relating to impartiality
and preserving participant self-determination, a mediator may, with the clearly informed consent of the participants,
provide the participants with information that the mediator is qualified by training or experience to provide. Such
information should be couched in general terms” (emphasis added). OMITTED10.2: “A mediator should only provide
information within the limits of his or her qualifications and competence while conducting a mediation”.
10.3: Mediators should not render assistance of a counselling nature “nor should they provide legal advice”. OMITTED
10.4: “Where appropriate, for example, in some family, environmental and workplace disputes, the mediator has a
responsibility to facilitate a discussion about the participants' awareness of the interests of others affected by the dispute,
and by the proposed agreement, and to assist the participants to consider the separate and individual needs of other such
persons” (emphasis added). OMITTED
10.5: “If a mediator, upon request, uses a ‘blended process’ model, such as evaluative mediation or conciliation”, this
process must be the subject of “clear consent” of the participants.
138
Commentary: s 10 Knowledge, skills and ethical principles
New PS s 10.1
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 23
This commentary focuses on the ethical aspects of mediation practice. Section 10.1 states that mediators must have
“an understanding of the ethical principles” outlined in that section. Section 7.3 of the old PS used slightly different
terminology, requiring mediators to have “an ethical understanding and commitment” in the listed areas. Although the
difference may be slight, ideally mediators should understand and commit to the various ethical principles.
Section 7.3 of the old PS emphasised that the lists of required competences were not exhaustive by using the terms
“including” and “including, but not limited to”. While the last phrase sounds like legalese, it should be imported into
the new PS. Without this phrase or something similar, the new PS gives the impression that the listed knowledge, skills
and ethical principles are exhaustive when they cannot be, given that the PS are minimum standards and that no set of
standards can capture all the ethical complexities of mediation.
There are a number of significant changes to the list of ethical principles required of mediators. The most obvious change
is that the reference to “neutrality” has been removed from the list of ethical principles. This is not a surprise and hardly
ground-breaking for the concept of mediator neutrality has come under intense scrutiny in recent years 49 and reference
to it has disappeared from popular definitions of mediation. 50 There is growing recognition that mediators cannot be
neutral if “neutrality” is taken to mean disinterest in the outcome of a dispute and absence of influence over the outcome of
mediation. 51
The reference to “Fiduciary obligations” has also been deleted from the list of ethical principles. The debate on this
issue continues, with some commentators claiming that it is only a matter of time before mediators are held to stand as
fiduciaries in some respects. 52 Recently, some authors have argued that the ethical paradigm underpinning mediation
should be changed from neutrality to one based on trust. 53 If this is the case, one would have expected the reference to
fiduciary obligations to remain.
Some concepts have been added to the list in s 10.1(c) of the new PS but for the most part, they are not new to mediation,
eg mediators have always owed a duty of competence to the participants, and it makes sense to include “competence” as
an ethical principle. Self-determination and informed consent, which have also been added to the list, are also familiar
concepts in mediation. Self-determination is widely recognised as a central value of mediation. 54 Self-determination is
only meaningful when it is coupled with informed consent of the participants. 55
The “principles” listed in s 10.1(c) could be better formulated as statements about the duties or responsibilities of
mediators, rather than as phrases such as “self-determination” or “informed consent”. Such statements might read as
follows (this is not intended as an exhaustive account):
• The process will be conducted by a mediator who is impartial and unbiased.
• The process will be conducted in private. The mediator will keep confidential anything which is said and done in
mediation, subject to specified exceptions.
• The mediator has an obligation to the parties to encourage and promote decision-making by them (self-determination)
on the basis of informed consent and without coercion. (The principle of voluntariness should be added to the list of
principles.)
• The mediator has an obligation to the parties to create a communication environment in which parties feel safe, and in
which the mediator will ensure procedural fairness and equity. If the mediator cannot ensure fairness and equity, then
he or she will withdraw from or terminate the mediation.
• The mediator will conduct him or herself with integrity and professionalism.
139
Ideally the terms in s 10.1(c) might be defined and the extent of the mediator's duty explained. For instance:
• What does “integrity” mean and how is it different from “honesty”?
• What is a mediator accountable for and to whom is the mediator accountable? Is he or she accountable for harm
caused to a third party who is not a party to the mediation?
• What does “professional conduct” mean?
• What is meant by self-determination?
• What is the mediator's duty as regards self-determination?
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 24
• What does informed consent mean and what must participants be informed about, eg alternatives to settlement, likely
outcome if a matter proceeds to litigation, consequences of the agreed outcome?
• Does a mediator have an obligation to be honest and if so, honest in relation to what? Who is the obligation owed to?
New PS s 10.2
Section 10.2 deals with the topic of information provided by the mediator and blended processes (the old PS contained
a separate section dealing with “information” provided by the mediator, see s 10). Section 10.2 needs to be read with
the proviso to s 2.2. The proviso reads, “[a] mediator does not evaluate or advise on the merits of, or determine the
outcome of, disputes”. There is a footnote in the proviso which refers the reader to s 10.2. This section briefly describes a
blended process as one which involves the “provision of advice” from the mediator (emphasis added). The section allows
a mediator to conduct a blended process when the requirements of the section – which are more extensive than those
required under the old PS, have been satisfied. The requirements are: participants' consent; appropriate qualifications and
professional indemnity held by the mediator; and provision of the advice in a manner which maintains and respects “the
principle of self-determination”.
140
Provisions omitted from old PS s 10
As mentioned, the old PS contained a separate section dealing with “information” provided by the mediator (see s 10).
The section needed to be read in conjunction with s 2.6. According to these provisions, mediators could give expert
information, without necessarily turning the process into a blended one, provided: the information was couched in general
and non-prescriptive terms, given at a time when the parties could integrate it into their decision-making, and the parties
gave their consent. The new PS do not appear to allow for the possibility of mediators giving “general expert information”
as opposed to “specific expert advice”. When mediators give information which tends to be specific, eg about the likely
outcome of litigation or the prospects of success at trial, they should ensure that they comply with the more stringent
requirements of s 10.2 of the new PS. This appears to be a positive development aimed at protecting the parties.
Many commentators will consider the omission of s 10.4 of the old standards to be a backwards step. Opinions differ
as to the extent to which a mediator is responsible for the interests of third parties not present at the mediation. Some
commentators favour active intervention by the mediator to ensure that the interests of vulnerable third parties are
protected. 56 Other authors take a more moderate approach on this issue. Hyman believes that a mediator should deal with
matters of fairness and justice in mediation but only to a limited extent – in much the same way as lawyers might deal
with moral issues in an interview with a client – by non-directive discussion of fairness and justice issues after which the
parties are free to determine the final outcome. 57 A similar view is expressed by Hughes who suggests that the mediator
should assist the parties to assess any agreement they reach for its fairness and enforceability without the mediator taking
responsibility for the content of the agreement. 58 This appears to be the position adopted in relevant mediator standards,
which impose upon mediators duties to help the parties reach a fair and equitable settlement (eg by raising questions as
to the fairness, equity and feasibility of proposed options for settlement) and to ensure consideration of the interests of
vulnerable parties and other affected and absent third persons – while leaving primary responsibility for the decision with
the parties. 59
New PS
11 Charging for services
There are three provisions in this section which, in brief, provide that: a mediator must obtain the participants' agreement
as to the amount of fees and how they are to be apportioned (11.1); a mediator must not charge fees based on the
outcome of the mediation “or calculated in a way that could influence the manner in which the mediator conducts the
mediation” (11.2); and a mediator will return promptly any fees or charges paid in advance which exceed the amount
payable (11.3).
141
Old PS
12 Charges for services
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 25
Statement of principle: Mediators should make all charges explicit to the parties and explain how they are calculated.
OMITTED
12: This section contained six points in relation to the charging of fees. In addition to the three points addressed in s 11 of
the new PS (see above), s 12 provided as follows:
• The mediator will explain any fees to be charged, ie he or she will explain how the fees are to be calculated, and any
related costs (s 12.1).
• Any written agreement with the participants should include a description of any fee arrangement with the mediator (s
12.2).
• While mediators cannot set fees on the basis of the mediation outcome, it is not unethical for a mediator to act pro
bono or to leave to the discretion of the parties the payment of any fees (s 12.3).
The underlined portions have been OMITTED.
Commentary: s 11 Charging for services
New PS s 11
Section 11 of the new PS picks up three points from s 12 of the old PS, but omits the three additional points mentioned
above. Section 11:
• Does not appear to require mediators to explain how their fees are calculated.
• Does not require the agreement in relation to fees to be in writing (to be fair, neither did s 12.2 of the old PS, but
mention of “any written agreement” including a description of any fee arrangement might have encouraged all
concerned to record their agreement in writing).
• Might discourage mediators from offering their services on a pro bono basis or from mediating with organisations
such as the Legal Aid Office and community justice programs where mediators are paid at minimal rates. If a
mediator is conducting a mediation on a pro bono basis, he or she might well set time constraints on the mediation
which would not apply if the mediator was conducting the mediation at their normal rate of remuneration. Section
11.2 should be amended along the lines of the wording used in s 12.3 of the old PS.
New PS
12 Provision of information and promotion of services
12.1: “A mediator must accurately represent their qualifications and experience and how they conduct their mediations”.
12.2: “A mediator must not guarantee results or outcomes from the mediation process or make statements likely to create
false expectations about favourable results”.
Regard should also be had to s 10.1(c)(viii) which requires honesty in marketing and advertising.
Also see s 12.3 (any information used for evaluation purposes must be de-identified) and s 12.4 (a mediator qualified under
this scheme can describe themselves as “Accredited Mediator NMAS”).
142
Old PS
13 Making public statements and promotion of services
Statement of principle: “The mediator should ensure that public statements made by the mediator promoting business are
accurate”. Section 12 of the new PS has a similar flavour.
13.1: The purpose of public statements concerning mediation processes should be to:
(a) educate the public about the process in order to help the public make informed judgments and choices; and
(b) present the mediation process objectively, as one which seeks to empower participants directly and
constitutes only one of several methods for arriving at an outcome
(emphasis added). OMITTED
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 26
13.2: Mediators are prohibited from misleading or deceiving the public when making statements about mediation and
promoting services. OMITTED however see 10.1(c)(viii) of the new PS.
13.3: When advertising professional services, mediators should restrict themselves to matters which educate and inform the
public. OMITTED
13.4: Where possible, mediators should “encourage and/or participate in research that can support further professional and
public education”. OMITTED
13.5: This provision enabled mediators to promote their accreditation under the NMAS.
Commentary: s 12 Provision of information and promotion of services
New PS s 12
The new provision (s 12) does nothing to further the cause in having mediation accepted as a profession devoted to public
service. In particular, the following points have been lost from s 13 of the old PS:
1. The old standards seemed more concerned with the profession's relationship with the public, with multiple
references to educating the public about mediation and representing mediation accurately and objectively so
that the public could make informed choices about dispute resolution processes (see eg ss 13.1, 13.3, 13.4).
2. Importantly, the only reference in the PS to “empowerment” of the participants through mediation (see s
13.1(b) of the old PS) has been omitted.
3. The sense of mediation being used for public service has been lost. Mediators are no longer encouraged to
participate in research “that can support further professional and public education” (see s 13.4).
New PS
13 Waiver by MSB
In exceptional circumstances the MSB may, conditionally or otherwise, waive compliance with any provision of the
Practice Standards on application by a RMAB.
There does not appear to be an equivalent provision in the old PS.
Potential shortcomings of the new PS
The new PS are relatively brief. They are reasonably well-structured. People who are familiar with mediation will find the
PS easy to read. They cover parts of the mediation process that previously had been glossed over, such as intake sessions and
preliminary conferences. However, the very brevity and simplicity of the new PS is also the source of their weakest points. Long
portions of information (all of those sections underlined in the table above) have been deleted from the old PS. As a consequence,
143
the usefulness of the new PS as a tool to educate mediators (and to instil in them a sense of the values of mediation), participants
and potential participants has been reduced.
Lost information
The mediation community needs to consider how the information lost from the old PS can best be disseminated to various
stakeholders. Anyone (mediators, lawyers, court and tribunal officials) who is in a position of having to advise potential
participants about what to expect in mediation might consider collating the material deleted from the old PS into a supplementary
user guide for distribution to relevant participants. RMABs might consider issuing supplementary standards and/or issuing a
formal commentary to the PS.
The main points which have been lost from the new PS include:
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 27
1. Mediation is not appropriate for all disputes or for all disputants, a point which is emphasised a number of times
in the old PS (see, eg ss 2.2, 3.3, 3.4 and 4.1 of the old PS).
2. Mediation is not just a dispute resolution process. It can be used, eg to negotiate the terms of a contract and
future plans (see, eg ss 1.1, 1.4, 2.1, 2.3 of the old PS).
3. Mediation practice is diverse (see s 1.4 of the old PS).
4. Mediation is not counselling and it is not the occasion for obtaining legal advice, a point emphasised in s 2.2
of the old PS.
5. There is less emphasis now on self-determination of the participants. The old PS contained multiple provisions
which emphasised self-determination (see eg ss 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 9.7, 9.8 and 10.1). There appears to be a single
reference to self-determination in the new PS (see s 2.2).
6. The parties' ability to have input into the process by which they resolve their differences has been reduced. Under
the old PS, the parties could negotiate what they wanted to achieve out of mediation (see, eg s 2.3 of the old
PS), and they were to be given an opportunity to agree about the way in which the mediation was conducted
(see s 3.2 of the old PS).
7. The only provision on empowerment of participants (s 13.1 of the old PS) has been omitted.
8. It is not clear what relationships the new PS are intended to cover, eg mediator and parties, mediator and judges/
court officials.
9. There has been a noticeable loss of concern for others not a party to the mediation but nonetheless affected by
it (see, eg ss 2.3, 2.4(g) and 9.7 of the old PS which have been omitted).
As has been noted above in the commentary, there are some provisions in the new PS which might be better worded. The
following matters need to be clarified:
• Mediators should help participants to get access to the standards (compare s 3.2(d) of the new PS with s 3.6 of the old PS).
• Mediators need to be alert to pre-existing power imbalances, as well as to changes in the balance that may occur during
mediation (see s 6.1 of the new PS).
• The wording of s 7.1, which gives a partial definition of “impartial”, might be amended to include bias by “word” as well
as bias by “action” and to extend the provision to a perception of bias, as well as actual bias.
• The additional criteria listed in s 9.7 of the old PS (for assessing any proposed agreement) might be added to s 7.7 of the new
PS. These are important criteria which highlight two of mediation's strongest features – it can produce outcomes that are
different from those which might be delivered by a court; and it can produce outcomes which the parties consider to be fair.
• The new PS are said to set minimum standards, yet the lists of knowledge, skills and ethical principles in s 10 appear to be
exhaustive and closed. In the coming years, other competencies might be added to these lists. For example, all mediators
(and all lawyers) need a basic knowledge and understanding of psychology.
There are gaps in the new PS of which mediators should be mindful. These are discussed next.
144
Mind the gaps
The new PS have left gaps which did not exist in the old PS. The most significant gaps are discussed below.
Application of the standards
It is a concern that the new PS might only apply to mediators who adopt a facilitative model of mediation. The drafters of the
PS might reconsider the definition of mediation and its connection to the application section of Part I of the Revised NMAS
documentation.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 28
Absence of higher order aspirational goals
Higher order goals which reflect the place of mediation in the justice system and the general community have not been included
in the new PS (nor were they included in the old ones). Mediation is now an integral component of the civil justice system,
a fact which should be reflected in the PS. It will be critical in the coming years to determine how and where mediation and
mediators fit within the justice system. Consideration will have to be given to questions such as: Do mediators owe a duty to
“the administration of justice” and if so, what is it?
Professions are meant to provide a public service. There is no sense, in the new PS, of mediators providing a public service for
society. One small way in which to demonstrate “the profession's commitment to integrity and public service”60 is to encourage
mediators – with an appropriately worded provision in the PS, to perform some pro bono services each year. As mentioned
above, the new PS appear to discourage the provision of pro bono mediation services (see s 11.2)
Gaps and uncertainties in the formulation of mediator duties
The new PS do not provide an exhaustive account of the duties of mediators. There are critical gaps and uncertainties, as
discussed below.
Confidentiality
One of the most troubling gaps in the new PS concerns the issue of confidentiality in mediation. There are three main problem
areas. First, it is generally accepted that mediators owe the participants a duty of confidentiality. This duty may arise from
contract or legislative provision. The PS should be another source of the duty – the PS should provide that mediators owe the
participants a duty of confidentiality in regard to information arising in connection with the mediation subject to stipulated
exceptions. Second, for the reasons discussed above (see the discussion on ss 9.1 and 3.2(b) of the new PS), mediators should
be required to personally explain to the participants, before commencing the mediation, the requirements of confidentiality and
its exceptions. It is an unsafe practice for mediators to rely on intake officers to explain these matters (and in any event, the
PS do not explicitly require intake officers to explain about the exceptions to confidentiality). Third, the standards should offer
some guidance to mediators who are subpoenaed or otherwise required to testify or produce documents in court. The new PS
are silent on this matter.
Accountability, professional conduct and integrity
Absence of clear definitions of terms such as “good faith” and “cooperation” is problematic. It is not a new problem. The new
PS have introduced more uncertain terms, eg what do the terms “professional conduct” and “integrity” mean and require from
a mediator? If mediators are accountable, to whom are they accountable and for what? How does integrity differ from honesty,
if at all?
Mediators orchestrate the flow of communication in mediation. They are skilled in directing the flow of communication using
techniques such as reframing and questioning. It is important therefore to ascertain whether or not mediators owe a duty of
honesty (aside from the very limited duty to be honest when advertising and promoting mediation services). As to whether
mediators owe a duty of honesty in relation to other matters, the PS are silent. The PS are also silent on whether or not mediators
owe a duty of candour. Other questions flow from this, eg: To whom are these duties owed,
145
if they exist, and in relation to what information? Should mediators be subject to a separate prohibition against misleading or
deceiving? The PS offer no specific guidance for mediators on these important matters.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 29
The answer to some of these questions might be different for lawyer mediators, as opposed to non-lawyer mediators. Lawyer
mediators continue to be bound by the rules of conduct of the legal profession – thus they owe general duties of honesty, fairness
and courtesy to all parties with whom they deal. 61 The interplay between mediator duties and the duties of lawyers has yet
to be explored.
Outcome fairness
What responsibility, if any, does a mediator have for outcome fairness? Assuming the procedure used in mediation is fair, that
the participants appear to be making fully informed decisions and that the proposed outcome does not involve the commission
of an offence or fraud, should a mediator intervene to protect a participant against a manifestly unfair agreement and if so,
what interventions are permitted? If a mediator intervenes, he or she may be breaching the most fundamental of obligations
– to assist participants to make their own decisions. This issue has been debated for decades and there is no clear agreement
by practitioners and scholars. For example, Schuwerk argues that “if it (the outcome) is a clearly unjust outcome, the dilemma
of whether or not to intervene should be decided in favour of intervention”. 62 But Bush and Stulberg take the view that “it is
not the mediator's job to guarantee a fair agreement, or any agreement at all; it is the mediator's job to guarantee the parties
the fullest opportunity for self-determination and mutual acknowledgment”. 63 At the minimum, the PS might alert mediators
to these diverse views. As part of their training, mediators should at least acquire techniques for raising matters of outcome
fairness in the consciousness of the participants.
A related issue concerns mediation and third parties.
Interests of third parties
Assuming again that the procedure used is fair and that the proposed outcome does not involve the commission of an offence or
fraud, should a mediator intervene to protect the interests of third parties, ie those who are not party to the mediation but who are
affected by it? The answer may depend on the subject matter of the dispute. For example, in family law disputes an obligation
to consider the interests of children is imposed on mediators (and legal representatives) by relevant legislation. 64 What about
in other contexts? Again, these matters can at least be flagged in the PS and mediators can be trained to raise the matter with
the mediation participants in a non-coercive and non-directive manner. It is a pity that less attention seems to be given to the
matter in the new PS.
More gaps: Lack of guidance in dealing with ethical dilemmas
Failure to alert practitioners to the potential for conflict of objectives and values
The mediation community has been debating some of the issues mentioned above, eg as to whether or not mediators are
responsible for outcome fairness, for many years without achieving consensus. When a mediator intervenes in any of the
circumstances discussed above, there is a possibility that his or her actions will be in contravention of certain of the ethical
principles enshrined in the PS. For example, if the mediator gives “information” or “advice” to an unrepresented party in an
attempt to
146
address a perceived power imbalance, the mediator may be acting contrary to the principle of impartiality. These matters cannot
be determinatively answered in the PS but the PS can at least prepare mediators for the potential for conflict.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 30
First, mediators must be made aware of the various objectives and values claimed for mediation. The relevant objectives
include: 65 dispute resolution according to standards agreed by the parties, satisfaction of individual interests or needs, party
empowerment, mutually acceptable outcomes which are also fair and stable, outcomes which represent the best alternatives
available (or Pareto optimal solutions) and maximisation of joint gains, enhanced relationships (or at least, minimisation of
damage to relationships), increased access to a “higher quality justice” (ie justice that is responsive to individual needs and
reflective of the preferences of the parties), efficiency and effectiveness. The values of mediation include:66 party participation
and autonomy; self-determination; informed consent; process fairness; and mediator impartiality.
Failure to prioritise various objectives and values
The PS do not indicate which objective and value, if any, is paramount in the event of conflict (eg in the way that standards
for lawyers prioritise the duty owed to the courts and the administration of justice). There does seem to be wide agreement that
self-determination is the central value of mediation, but the answer cannot be as simple as this for we recognise that parties are
not entitled to have it anyway they want it – ie there are limits. Other values have to be weighed into the mix.
In reality, it is difficult to prioritise the objectives and values underlying mediation because the priority afforded to them differs
depending on whether one is looking at the issue from the perspective of society, individual disputants, the service provider,
and the individual mediator – all of whom may select some objectives and values over others. 67 Mediators need to be aware
of the range of objectives and values at stake in a given mediation so that they can weigh up the alternative courses of action
open to them and arrive at a decision that they can justify, if need be.
Failure to guide mediators through an ethical evaluation process
One of the most important functions of standards of professional conduct is to assist members of the relevant professional group
to recognise and respond appropriately to ethical dilemmas. Mediators will often find themselves confronted with an ethical
dilemma. An ethical dilemma arises when there is a “[c]hoice of competing values (ideas of goodness)” 68 which suggests “a
variety of alternative and contradictory courses of action”. 69
However, standards of conduct are limited in their capacity to provide practitioners with “right” answers for every dilemma
that they may face. If standards (or more precisely, the drafters of those standards) could provide easy right answers, ethical
dilemmas would not be dilemmas. Dilemmas exist precisely because they are resistant to certain correct answers. There are
other reasons why it is notoriously difficult to draft standards which provide “right” answers. They include:
147
1. The inherent vagueness of language.
2. The traditional tensions between the need for generality on the one hand, and the need for specificity on the other.
3. The fact that no set of standards can possibly cover every eventuality that might arise in mediation. It is unrealistic
to expect them to do so. And in fact, it would be highly undesirable to produce a set of standards which purported
to provide an answer for every situation. Mediation is highly valued as a dynamic, flexible and informal process.
The mediation community does not want or need a set of formal, inflexible rules. Mediators need room to exercise
discretion in relation to some matters.
4. The difficulty involved in gaining consensus from all stakeholders.
Despite the challenges involved in drafting standards of conduct, it is possible for a set of standards to:
1. Alert mediators to the potential for value conflict. Section 9.7 of the old PS is a perfect example of such a
provision. Unfortunately, it has been omitted from the new PS.
2. If possible, indicate relative priority of values.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 31
3. Indicate possible alternative courses of action (or inaction).
4. Give mediators some guidance on the variable factors that might be taken into account in deciding what to do
(such as the position of the parties relative to each other, the nature of the dispute and so on) so that mediators
can take these factors into account, weigh up the possibilities and arrive at a decision that they (the mediators)
can justify.
The new PS do not do these things.
Conclusion
Those responsible for drafting the NMAS Practice Standards (and the Approval Standards) have done a tremendous job. The
new PS are better structured than the old ones. They are streamlined and easier to read, for some participants as least, ie those
already familiar with mediation. But in streamlining and being economical with language, the drafters of the new PS have
jettisoned much of what was useful in the old PS – including its emphasis on the diversity of mediation practice and its focus
on the centrality of self-determination. The new PS do not “specify clearly the minimum practice and competency requirements
for mediators” as recently claimed by the new chair of the MSB. For all the reasons discussed in this article, it is submitted that
this claim is overstated. There are significant gaps and uncertainties in the new PS. If the PS are to reach their full potential, the
gaps need to be filled, some sections need to be re-written in more user-friendly terms, and some guidance needs to be provided
in respect of a number of ethical dilemmas.
The MSB, NMABs and individual mediators each have a part to play in ensuring that all relevant information relating to
mediation is provided to prospective participants, participants and anyone else contemplating the practice of mediation in
Australia. Information may be disseminated through a combination of supplementary guidelines and commentaries such as the
one provided in this article (from the MSB and NMABs), and information kits and agreements to mediate (steps which can
be taken by individual mediators). Eventually the MSB might revise the PS again to take into account the matters raised in
this article.
Footnotes
* Associate Professor, Faculty of Law, Bond University, Australia. All websites viewed May 2016.
1 See National Mediator Accreditation System (NMAS) available at < http://www.msb.org.au>. Also see
the historical account of the NMAS available at <http://www.msb.org.au/mediator-standards/standards>.
2 For a list of Recognised Mediator Accreditation Bodies or RMABs, see the RMAB Contact List available
at <http://msb.org.au/accreditation-bodies/rmab-contact-list>.
3 The Approval Standards “specify the training, assessment, personal qualities and experience required of
a NMAS accredited mediator and for their renewal of accreditation”: NMAS, s 1.2(a).
4 NMAS, s 1.2.
5 Letter from Anna Lee Cribb, Chair of the Mediator Standards Board (MSB) to members, 8 March 2015.
Also see NMAS, Part I – Introduction, Structure.
6 Letter from Anna Lee Cribb, n 5.
7 Letter from Anna Lee Cribb, n 5 (emphasis added).
8 See NMAS, s 1.2(b). Generally, on the functions of standards of conduct, see Margaret Ann Wilkinson,
Christa Walker and Peter Mercer, “Do Codes of Ethics Actually Shape Legal Practice?” (2000) 45 McGill
Law Journal 645, 651-652; Vincent R Johnson, “The Virtues and Limits of Codes in Legal Ethics” (2000)
14 Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethics and Public Policy 25, 41 ; Scott Peppet, “ Lawyers' Bargaining
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 32
Ethics, Contract, and Collaboration: The End of the Legal Profession and the Beginning of Professional
Pluralism” (2005) 90 Iowa Law Review 475, 506.
9 NMAS, Part I – Introduction, Purpose.
10 NMAS, Part I – Introduction, Application (footnote omitted).
11 For instance, Commonwealth government agencies (and their legal counsel) and family dispute resolution
system lawyers are all subject to additional regulation: see Legal Services Directions 2005 (Cth) and
Family Law (Family Dispute Resolution Practitioners) Regulations 2008 (Cth) Pt 3 respectively.
12 NMAS, Part I – Introduction, Role of mediators in a mediation process.
13 See, eg Queensland Law Society, The Australian Solicitors Conduct Rules 2012  in Practice: A
Commentary for Australian Legal Practitioners  (2014). Also see the American Bar Association Model
Rules of Professional Conduct (2010).
14 This statement appeared in a box.
15 In theory, a mediator can be penalised for non-compliance with the Standards. Each RMAB is responsible
for having a complaint system that meets industry benchmarks (see NMAS, s 1.4). According to NMAS,
s 5, where a mediator is significantly non-compliant with the Approval and Practice Standards, an RMAB
may suspend the mediator's accreditation and specify any conditions, such as further training, which must
be met by the mediator prior to seeking reinstatement of accreditation. However, given that the NMAS is
a voluntary system and that mediators do not need to be accredited to practise as a mediator, suspension
may have little impact.
16 See, eg the framework imposed by legislation such as the Civil Proceedings Act 2011 (Qld).
17 The definition also appears in NMAS, Part I – Introduction, footnote 1, in the section dealing with the
application of the Standards.
18 Susan Douglas, Ethics in Mediation: Centralising Relationships of Trust  (Paper presented at the 4 th
ADR Research Network Round Table, 12-13 September 2015).
19 Despite the diversity of mediation practice, there is wide agreement that party self-determination is central
to all models of mediation. It has been called “[t]he controlling principle of mediation” (Jacqueline M
Nolan-Haley, “Lawyers, Clients, and Mediation” (1998) 73 Notre Dame Law Review 1369, 1374 ); the
driving value behind mediation (Lela Porter Love, “ Mediation: The Romantic Days Continue” (1997)
38 South Texas Law Review 735, 739 ); and “the most fundamental principle of mediation” (James J
Alfini, “Mediation as a Calling: Addressing the Disconnect Between Mediation Ethics and the Practices
of Lawyer Mediators” (2008) 49 South Texas Law Review 829, 830).
20 The term “facilitative” is not actually used in the section. However, the definition used in the Standards
tracks closely with Folberg and Taylor's early definition of mediation – one which has been described as
facilitative. Folberg and Taylor defined mediation as: “The process by which the participants, together
with the assistance of a neutral person or persons, systematically isolate disputed issues in order to
develop options, consider alternatives, and reach a consensual settlement that will accommodate their
needs”: see J Folberg and A Taylor, Mediation: A Comprehensive Guide to Resolving Conflicts Without
Giving In (Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, 1988) 7.
21 Laurence Boulle, Mediation: Principles, Process, Practice  (LexisNexis Butterworths, 3 rd  ed, 2011)
43-47. Boulle's framework is one of a number of categorisations available. One of the most well-known is
that of Riskin, who classified mediator approaches to mediation by way of a grid consisting of four style
quadrants for facilitative narrow, evaluative narrow, facilitative broad and evaluative broad mediation
styles: see Leonard L Riskin, “ Decisionmaking in Mediation: The New Old Grid and the New New
Grid System” (2003) 79 Notre Dame Law Review 1, 3 . Also see, eg Michal Alberstein who discusses
pragmatic, transformative and narrative models of mediation: Michal Alberstein, “ Forms of Mediation
and Law: Cultures of Dispute Resolution” (2007) 22 Ohio State Journal on Dispute Resolution 321,
325-331. Whether called styles or models, they represent different theories about how mediators should
act in relation to the parties.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 33
22 Boulle refers to these categories as archetypical models because they are not so much discrete forms
of mediation practice but rather ways of conceptualising the different tendencies in practice: Boulle, n
21, 43. The most heated debate has concerned the appropriateness of “evaluative mediation”, where the
mediator gives the parties an opinion on the likely outcome of court proceedings.
23 Generally, see Bobette Wolski, “The New Limitations of Fisher and Ury's Model of Interest-based
Negotiation: Not Necessarily the Ethical Alternative” (2012) 19 James Cook University Law Review 127.
24 Research shows that use of a number of approaches by mediators is the norm “rather than the exception
in the mediation of civil legal disputes”: Dwight Golann, “ Variations in Mediation: How – and Why –
Legal Mediators Change Styles in the Course of a Case” [2000] Journal of Dispute Resolution 41, 42 .
Also see Boulle, n 21, 43; Riskin, n 21, 14-18; Jeffrey W Stempel, “ The Inevitability of the Eclectic:
Liberating ADR from Ideology” [2000] Journal of Dispute Resolution 247, 248.
25 Kimberlee K Kovach, “New Wine Requires New Wineskins: Transforming Lawyer Ethics for Effective
Representation in a Non-Adversarial Approach to Problem Solving: Mediation” (2001) 28 Fordham
Urban Law Journal 935, 964.
26 One of the most well-known judicial interpretations of “good faith” in Australia can be found in the case
of Western Australia v Taylor (1996) 134 FLR 211; [1996] NNTTA 34, 224-225 heard by the National
Native Title Tribunal. Member Sumner set out a list of 18 indicia which defined good faith negotiation
under the Native Title Act 1993 (Cth). These indicia are still relied upon: see Cosmos v Alexander [2009]
NNTTA 35, [22]-[26].
27 Samantha Hardy and Olivia Rundle, Mediation for Lawyers  (CCH Australia Ltd, 2010) 230; Bobette
Wolski, “The Truth About Honesty and Candour in Mediation: What the Tribunal Left Unsaid in Mullins'
Case” (2012) 36 MULR 706, 726-727.
28 United Group Rail Services Ltd v Rail Corporation (NSW) (2009) 74 NSWLR 618; [2009] NSWCA 177,
[76] (Allsop P), discussed in Wolski, n 27, 726.
29 See State Bank v Freeman (Unreported, NSWSC, Badgery-Parker J, 31 January 1996) 35.
30 Hardy and Rundle, n 27, 230; Anne M Burr, “Ethics in Negotiation: Does Getting to Yes Require
Candor?” [2001] Dispute Resolution Journal 10, 13.
31 See the discussion in Wolski, n 27, 727. Also see FMG Pilbara Pty Ltd v Cox  (2009) 175 FCR
141; [2009] FCAFC 49 . In the US, see Roger L Carter, “ Oh, Ye of Little [Good] Faith: Questions,
Concerns and Commentary on Efforts to Regulate Participant Conduct in Mediations” [2002] Journal
of Dispute Resolution 367, 384, 395 ; and Maureen A Weston, “ Checks on Participant Conduct in
Compulsory ADR: Reconciling the Tension in the Need for Good-Faith Participation, Autonomy, and
Confidentiality” (2001) 76 Indiana Law Journal 591, 626-627.
32 American Bar Association Settlement Guidelines, Committee Notes to Guideline 4.3.1, 49.
33 See Boulle, n 21, 77, explains that “mediators are obliged to conduct the process in a way which is fair,
even-handed and objective as between the parties, and is seen to be so by the parties”.
34 The concept of “process fairness”  has been discussed at length in the literature. For example,
Welsh identifies four particular process elements that heighten perceptions of procedural justice: “the
opportunity for disputants to express their ‘voice’, assurance that a third party considered what they
said, and treatment that is both even-handed and dignified” : Nancy A Welsh, “ Disputants' Decision
Control in Court-Connected Mediation: A Hollow Promise Without Procedural Justice” [2002] Journal
of Dispute Resolution 179 , 185 (citations omitted). For more on criteria for procedural fairness, see
Jill Howieson, “Perceptions of Procedural Justice and Legitimacy in Local Court Mediation” (2002) 9
Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law  available at <https://www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/
v9n2/howieson92.html>; and Omer Shapira, “ Joining Forces in Search for Answers: The Use of
Therapeutic Jurisprudence in the Realm of Mediation Ethics” (2008) 8 Pepperdine Dispute Resolution
Law Journal 243, 254.
35 It is included in most standards of conduct for mediators in most jurisdictions.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 34
36 Nancy A Welsh, “ The Thinning Vision of Self-Determination in Court-Connected Mediation: The
Inevitable Price of Institutionalization?” (2001) 6 Harvard Negotiation Law Review 1, 17-18 ;
Jacqueline M Nolan-Haley, “Informed Consent in Mediation: A Guiding Principle for Truly Educated
Decisionmaking” (1999) 74 Notre Dame Law Review 775, 790-791. Also see Donald T Weckstein, “In
Praise of Party Empowerment – and of Mediator Activism” (1997) 33 Willamette Law Review 501, 530.
37 See generally Bobette Wolski, “Mediator Settlement Strategies: Winning Friends and Influencing
People” (2001) 12 Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal 248; Nolan-Haley, n 36, 790-791.
38 See Laurence Boulle and Nadja Alexander, Mediation: Skills and Techniques (LexisNexis Butterworths,
2012) 112, 118; Peter Condliffe, Conflict Management: A Practical Guide  (LexisNexis Butterworths,
4 th  ed, 2012) 264; Boulle, n 21, 236-237.
39 Christopher W Moore, The Mediation Process: Practical Strategies for Resolving Conflict (Jossey-Bass,
3 rd  ed, 2003) 77 (who asserts that mediators have a procedural bias towards interest-based negotiation).
There is an explicit preference for an interest-based approach in certain types of disputes, eg in family
law matters: John Lande and Gregg Herman, “Fitting the Forum to the Family Fuss: Choosing Mediation,
Collaborative Law, or Cooperative Law for Negotiating Divorce Cases” (2004) 42 Family Court Review
280, 282.
40 It is well recognised in the literature that most negotiations are neither purely positional nor interest-
based. See, eg Raymond A Friedman and Debra L Shapiro, “Deception and Mutual Gains Bargaining: Are
They Mutually Exclusive?” (1995) 11 Negotiation Journal 243, 244, 247; Charles B Craver, “Negotiation
Ethics for Real World Interactions” (2010) 25 Ohio State Journal on Dispute Resolution 299, 305; Alex J
Hurder, “The Lawyer's Dilemma: To Be or Not To Be a Problem-Solving Negotiator” (2007) 14 Clinical
Law Review 253, 291.
41 Roger Fisher and William Ury, Getting to Yes: Negotiating an Agreement Without Giving In  (Business
Books Limit, 2 nd  ed, 1991) 4. The first edition was published in 1981.
42 Drawn from a definition provided by A Chay and J Smith, Legal Interviewing in Practice  (LBC
Information Services, Sydney, 1996) 37.
43 This article does not deal with the possible conflict that may arise when a mediator is bound by two (or
more) codes.
44 See references at n 56.
45 See references at n 62 and n 63.
46 Civil Dispute Resolution Act 2011 (Cth) s 4.
47 See, eg Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors' Conduct Rules 2015 (NSW), r 4.1.2; Legal
Profession Uniform Conduct (Barristers) Rules 2015 (NSW), r 4(c).
48 The court has had occasion to discuss the meaning of courtesy. Courtesy connotes politeness. That clearly
varies depending on the circumstances': see Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee v Fleming [2006]
WASAT 352, [72]-[73].
49 See generally Wolski, n 37. Also see Susan Douglas, “Neutrality in Mediation: A Study of Mediator
Perceptions” (2008) 8 Queensland University of Technology Law and Justice Journal 139, 150; Tony
Bogdanoski, “The Neutral Mediator's Perennial Dilemma: To Intervene or Not to Intervene” (2009) 9
Queensland University of Technology Law and Justice Journal 26, 39. Douglas claims that there have
been a number of responses to deal with the apparent inconsistency between the rhetoric of neutrality
and the actuality of practice, including “calls to simply abandon neutrality as an integral component of
mediation practice; calls to reframe its significance as no longer a core tenet of practice; and calls to
replace it with alternative legitimating principles.”: Douglas, 140 (citations omitted). The problem is that
there is no consensus on how it should be reframed. Several authors recommend that mediator neutrality
be reconceptualised or reframed as a situated, contextual concept in such a way as to make it legitimate for
mediators to intervene to deal with the parties' problematic power relations and to “ensure fair outcomes”:
see respectively Hilary Astor, “Mediator Neutrality: Making Sense of Theory and Practice” (2007) 16
Social & Legal Studies 221, 236 and Bogdanoski, 43. Still other commentators believe that the whole
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 35
notion of neutrality is a “fiction”: James R Coben, “Gollum, Meet Sméagol: A Schizophrenic Rumination
on Mediator Values Beyond Self-determination and Neutrality” (2004) 5 Cardozo Journal of Conflict
Resolution 65.
50 In the first edition of his popular text on mediation, Moore described mediators as “acceptable, impartial,
and neutral” third parties: Christopher Moore, The Mediation Process: Practical Strategies for Resolving
Conflict (Jossey-Bass, 1991) 14. In a later edition of the text, he describes mediators merely as
“acceptable” third parties: Moore, n 39, 14-15.
51 All mediators have some interest in the outcome of the dispute. As Weckstein notes, “inherent in the
nature of the mediator's calling is a ‘bias’ in favour of settlement … and many mediators push hard to
achieve that end”: Weckstein, n 36, 510.
52 Rebekah Ryan Clark, “The Writing on the Wall: The Potential Liability of Mediators as
Fiduciaries” (2006) 4 Brigham Young University Law Review 1033, 1034. However, see the discussion
by Boulle, n 21, 728 who thinks it unlikely that “courts will apply the fiduciary concept to mediation
relationships”.
53 Douglas, n 18.
54 See discussion and references at n 19 and n 36.
55 See discussion in relation to NMAS, s 7.4 and n 36.
56 For instance, Hobbs and Susskind suggest that mediators and possibly legal representatives have duties
to parties beyond those at the mediation table in family law and public interest disputes: Steven H
Hobbs, “Facilitative Ethics in Divorce Mediation: A Law and Process Approach” (1988) 22 University
of Richmond Law Review 325, 327, 339; Lawrence Susskind, “Environmental Mediation and the
Accountability Problem” (1981) 6 Vermont Law Review 1, 40-41.
57 Jonathan M Hyman, “Swimming in the Deep End: Dealing with Justice in Mediation” (2004) 6 Cardozo
Journal of Conflict Resolution 19, 32, 37, 44.
58 Patricia Hughes, “ Ethics in Mediation: Which Rules? Whose Rules?” (2001) 50 University of New
Brunswick Law Journal 251, 259-260.
59 See the standards and guidelines for mediators discussed in Boulle, n 21, 481.
60 Nicola Higgs-Kleyn and Dimitri Kapelianis, “The Role of Professional Codes in Regulating Ethical
Conduct” (1999) 19 Journal of Business Ethics 363, 363, 365.
61 See, eg Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors' Conduct Rules 2015 (NSW), r 4.1.2; Legal
Profession Uniform Conduct (Barristers) Rules 2015 (NSW), r 4(c).
62 Robert P Schuwerk, “Reflections on Ethics and Mediation” (1997) 38 South Texas Law Review 757, 764.
63 Robert A Baruch Bush, “Efficiency and Protection, or Empowerment and Recognition? The Mediator's
Role and Ethical Standards in Mediation” (1989) 41 Florida Law Review 253, 272; Joseph B Stulberg,
“The Theory and Practice of Mediation: A Reply to Professor Susskind” (1981) 6 Vermont Law Review
Review 85, 86-88. Also see Leonard L Riskin, “Toward New Standards for the Neutral Lawyer in
Mediation” (1984) 26 Arizona Law Review 329, 330 who argues that mediator intervention erodes the
consensual nature of any agreement.
64 In Australia (and in England and Wales), the law dictates that the children's welfare is paramount.
Generally, see Lisa Webley, “Divorce Solicitors and Ethical Approaches – The Best Interests of the Client
and/or the Best Interests of the Family?” (2004) 7 Legal Ethics 231, 247.
65 Boulle, n 21, 91-97; Tania Sourdin, Alternative Dispute Resolution (Lawbook Co., 3 rd  ed, 2008) 18-24;
Peter Adler, Karen Lovaas and Neal Milner, “The Ideologies of Mediation: The Movement's Own
Story” (1988) 10 Law & Policy 317, 331; and C Harrington and S Merry, “Ideological Production: The
Making of Community Mediation” (1988) 22 Law & Society Review 709, 715.
66 Carrie Menkel-Meadow, “Ethics in Alternative Dispute Resolution: New Issues, No Answers From the
Adversary Conception of Lawyers' Responsibility” (1997) 38 South Texas Law Review 407, 453; Nolan-
Haley, n 19, 1371; Welsh, n 36, 16.
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...
 WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 36
67 This is reflected in the work that was undertaken by the National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory
Council (NADRAC) in developing ADR Standards. NADRAC examined and identified the objectives
of ADR from the perspective of the parties (or users of the services), ADR practitioners providing the
service, objectives of governments, and society as a whole: NADRAC, A Framework for ADR Standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney-General, April 2001) 13.
68 Joseph Fletcher, “Situation Ethics, Law and Watergate” (1975) 6 Cumberland Law Review 35, 55. Also
see Julie MacFarlane, “ Mediating Ethically: The Limits of Codes of Conduct and the Potential of a
Reflective Practice Model” (2002) 40 Osgoode Hall Law Journal 49, 57.
69 Christine Parker and Adrian Evans, Inside Lawyers' Ethics (Cambridge University Press, 2007) 10.
End of Document © 2026 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.