Again, this is more context specific than s
3.2(a) of the new PS. 3. Perhaps most important of all, s 3.4(c) of the old PS has not been reproduced in the new PS. This provision,
which relates to confidentiality, is discussed further below. 4. Mediators were required to “advise participants of the mediator's role in relation to the provision of advice
or other services” (eg a mediator might say, “although I am a lawyer, my role is not to give you legal
advice”). 121
Many mediators will be trained to deal with these matters as part of their opening statement and they will do so
instinctively. However, this may not be the case with new mediators (or for some “old” mediators). The new PS do not have a provision equivalent to s 3.5 of the old PS. Section 3.5 encouraged the participants to reduce
their agreement to mediate and their agreement regarding confidentiality (or its waiver) to writing. This is a matter of
good practice and it is difficult to understand why the provision has been omitted. It is not enough simply to explain to
participants the nature and content of such agreements should they happen to have entered into them (see s 3.2(b) of the
new PS). New PS
4 Conducting mediation: The mediation meeting
4.1: According to this provision, the mediation meeting will ordinarily include a joint session “in which the participants
communicate directly with each other”; it may also include separate sessions and shuttle negotiations. 4.2: The mediation may be conducted over multiple meetings. 4.3: The mediation may conclude whether or not an agreement is reached. Commentary: s 4 Conducting mediation: The mediation meeting
New PS s 4
The old PS did not have a section headed “conducting the mediation meeting”. There was information provided about the
procedural aspects and stages of mediation (eg in s 3.4(h), which talked about separate sessions, and s 9 which concerned
procedural fairness), but the PS have been improved with the creation of a separate and discrete section on this stage of the
mediation. The assumption underlying s 4 of the new PS is that the participants have been given more detailed information as required
under s 3.1(a) of the new PS. If this has not already occurred, then s 4 may cause participants some concerns. They are
not likely to be familiar with the terms “separate sessions” and “shuttle negotiations”, unless they have used mediation
before.