The terms are not defined either in s 3.1(a) or s 4 of the new PS. Even the expression “joint session” may cause
some concern, especially if hostile parties (or an easily intimidated party) are under the impression that they have to
talk directly to each other. These terms need to be defined and described in such a way that the parties have a good idea
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 11
of what “usually” transpires in the various sessions (the old PS did not deal with these concepts either). Of course, it is
difficult to pin down the “usual” practises in mediation. The wording of s 3.4(h) of the old PS is helpful. It provided that
the mediator should “discuss with or inform the participants about the procedures and practices in the mediation, such as:
(i) the circumstances under which separate sessions may be held”. This allows for the possibility that no separate sessions
will be held or at the other extreme, that the entire mediation will be conducted as a shuttle mediation. 122
New PS
5 Conducting mediation: Suspending or terminating
5.1: “A mediator may suspend or terminate the mediation if they form the view that mediation is no longer suitable
or productive”, eg where a participant: (a) “is unable or unwilling to participate or continue in the mediation”; (b) “is
misusing the mediation”; or (c) is “not engaging in the mediation in good faith”. It may also be suspended if (d) “the safety
of one or more participants may be at risk”. 5.2: Mediators should advise of their intention to suspend or terminate. 5.3: Mediators should encourage the participants to consider alternative dispute resolution procedures. Old PS
11 Termination of the mediation process
Statement of principle: “The mediator may suspend or terminate a mediation process if continuation of the process might
harm or prejudice one or more of the participants”. Although the word “prejudice” no longer appears, the terms of s 5 of
the new PS are wide enough to cover this situation, as well as the other circumstances contemplated by this statement of
principle.11.1: “Mediators should be alert to situations where parties or their advisers seek to misuse the mediation process
to achieve other ends” such as delaying or prolonging litigation, or where the mediator is of the opinion that one or more of
the participants is “acting in bad faith”. OMITTED
11.2: This was a general provision under which a mediator could suspend or terminate the process if the process was, in
the mediator's opinion, being used “for a purpose other than a mutual attempt to arrive at resolution or its usefulness has in
some other way been exhausted” (OMITTED) where possible a mediator should provide reasonable notice to participants
of their intention to suspend or terminate. 11.3: “The mediator may withdraw from the mediation process when any agreement is being reached by the participants
that the mediator believes is unconscionable” (OMITTED). The section also provided that the mediator should assist the
parties to assess further process options in taking the matter forward. This provision is similar to s 5.3 of the new PS. Commentary: s 5 Conducting mediation: Suspending or terminating
New PS s 5
Under the old PS, the topic of suspension or termination of the mediation was dealt with in s 11.