It only imposes on the mediator an obligation to disclose potential grounds of bias or conflict of
interest, and not actual grounds of bias or conflict. The drafters may have thought that: if potential for bias or conflict has
to be revealed and dealt with in accordance with the provision, then a situation of actual bias or conflict not sanctioned by
the parties, will not arise (this is the “nip it in the bud early” idea). This is an unrealistic assumption. There might be an
actual ground of bias or conflict in existence before the mediator ever has contact with the participants. The conflict might
come under s 7.3 (see below) but not the bias. This is a situation that could fall through the gap. The preferred alternative is
to amend s 7.2 to include actual biases and conflicts. New PS s 7.3
Section 7.3 of the new PS is similar to s 5.1 of the old PS, setting out the circumstances in which a mediator can continue
to mediate, despite a bias or conflict, or a potential for one. At least, that seems to be the intention of the section. However,
it currently only addresses situations involving a conflict of interest. It should be expanded to also cover situations
involving a bias. At present, s 7.2 does not cover actual grounds of bias or conflict, only potential ones; s 7.3 does not deal with situations of
bias, only with a conflict of interest. Neither section allows for perceptions of conflict or bias. New PS s 7.4
Section 7.4 of the new PS is one of the most important provisions in the Standards. 35 It replaces s 9.1 of the old PS. The
old and new provisions (see s 9.1 and s 7.4 respectively) are almost identical except that “will” (old PS) has become a
“must” (new PS). This provision is now prescriptive in its format. It provides: “A mediator must support participants to
reach agreements freely, voluntarily, without undue influence and on the basis of informed consent”. Unfortunately, none
of the important terms in this provision are defined in either set of Standards. As mentioned earlier, the concept of self-
determination is not explained fully either.