54 Self-determination is
only meaningful when it is coupled with informed consent of the participants. 55
The “principles” listed in s 10.1(c) could be better formulated as statements about the duties or responsibilities of
mediators, rather than as phrases such as “self-determination” or “informed consent”. Such statements might read as
follows (this is not intended as an exhaustive account):
• The process will be conducted by a mediator who is impartial and unbiased. • The process will be conducted in private. The mediator will keep confidential anything which is said and done in
mediation, subject to specified exceptions. • The mediator has an obligation to the parties to encourage and promote decision-making by them (self-determination)
on the basis of informed consent and without coercion. (The principle of voluntariness should be added to the list of
principles.)
• The mediator has an obligation to the parties to create a communication environment in which parties feel safe, and in
which the mediator will ensure procedural fairness and equity. If the mediator cannot ensure fairness and equity, then
he or she will withdraw from or terminate the mediation. • The mediator will conduct him or herself with integrity and professionalism. 139
Ideally the terms in s 10.1(c) might be defined and the extent of the mediator's duty explained. For instance:
• What does “integrity” mean and how is it different from “honesty”? • What is a mediator accountable for and to whom is the mediator accountable? Is he or she accountable for harm
caused to a third party who is not a party to the mediation? • What does “professional conduct” mean? • What is meant by self-determination? • What is the mediator's duty as regards self-determination? Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 24
• What does informed consent mean and what must participants be informed about, eg alternatives to settlement, likely
outcome if a matter proceeds to litigation, consequences of the agreed outcome? • Does a mediator have an obligation to be honest and if so, honest in relation to what?