• The new PS are said to set minimum standards, yet the lists of knowledge, skills and ethical principles in s 10 appear to be
exhaustive and closed. In the coming years, other competencies might be added to these lists. For example, all mediators
(and all lawyers) need a basic knowledge and understanding of psychology. There are gaps in the new PS of which mediators should be mindful. These are discussed next. 144
Mind the gaps
The new PS have left gaps which did not exist in the old PS. The most significant gaps are discussed below. Application of the standards
It is a concern that the new PS might only apply to mediators who adopt a facilitative model of mediation. The drafters of the
PS might reconsider the definition of mediation and its connection to the application section of Part I of the Revised NMAS
documentation. Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 28
Absence of higher order aspirational goals
Higher order goals which reflect the place of mediation in the justice system and the general community have not been included
in the new PS (nor were they included in the old ones). Mediation is now an integral component of the civil justice system,
a fact which should be reflected in the PS. It will be critical in the coming years to determine how and where mediation and
mediators fit within the justice system. Consideration will have to be given to questions such as: Do mediators owe a duty to
“the administration of justice” and if so, what is it? Professions are meant to provide a public service. There is no sense, in the new PS, of mediators providing a public service for
society. One small way in which to demonstrate “the profession's commitment to integrity and public service”60 is to encourage
mediators – with an appropriately worded provision in the PS, to perform some pro bono services each year. As mentioned
above, the new PS appear to discourage the provision of pro bono mediation services (see s 11.2)
Gaps and uncertainties in the formulation of mediator duties
The new PS do not provide an exhaustive account of the duties of mediators. There are critical gaps and uncertainties, as
discussed below.