129
New PS s 7.6
The provision in s 7.6 (and its equivalent in s 9.5 of the old PS) is laudable – a mediator must ensure that participants have
“sufficient time and opportunity” to access advice or information “necessary for their decision-making” (emphasis added). This is a necessary part of ensuring informed consent by the parties. However, if a participant does not have the means,
ability, financial resources etc required to gain access to and understand the advice or information, that participant will not
be in a position to make a fully informed decision. Mediators will be faced with an ethical dilemma (one which should
be highlighted by the Standards): should they let a party enter into an agreement without all the necessary information
(thus putting at risk or undermining the value of self-determination) or provide them with the missing information (thus
compromising the value of impartiality)? New PS s 7.7
Section 7.7 consists of two parts. First, it imposes on mediators an obligation to encourage and support interest-based
negotiation between the participants. There is, it is suggested, a procedural bias towards interest-based negotiations. This bias is of long standing. 39 It is not problematic as long as mediators understand that there are other approaches
to negotiation and in fact, research suggests that positional or distributive negotiation exists to some extent in most
negotiations. 40 Mediators need to be trained in the theory and practices of both approaches; they must be skilled in
responding to both approaches. The second part of s 7.7 of the new PS imposes an obligation on mediators to assist the participants to assess any proposed
agreement by reference to two criteria: (i) by how well it satisfies the interests, issues and needs of the participants; and (ii)
on the basis of long-term viability. There are other criteria which should be taken into account, as discussed next. Provisions omitted from old PS ss 5 and 9
There are some provisions from s 5.2 of the old PS, such as the requirement to minimise the risk of bias or conflict
occurring, which ideally should be included in the Standards.