Old PS
11 Termination of the mediation process
Statement of principle: “The mediator may suspend or terminate a mediation process if continuation of the process might
harm or prejudice one or more of the participants”. Although the word “prejudice” no longer appears, the terms of s 5 of
the new PS are wide enough to cover this situation, as well as the other circumstances contemplated by this statement of
principle.11.1: “Mediators should be alert to situations where parties or their advisers seek to misuse the mediation process
to achieve other ends” such as delaying or prolonging litigation, or where the mediator is of the opinion that one or more of
the participants is “acting in bad faith”. OMITTED
11.2: This was a general provision under which a mediator could suspend or terminate the process if the process was, in
the mediator's opinion, being used “for a purpose other than a mutual attempt to arrive at resolution or its usefulness has in
some other way been exhausted” (OMITTED) where possible a mediator should provide reasonable notice to participants
of their intention to suspend or terminate. 11.3: “The mediator may withdraw from the mediation process when any agreement is being reached by the participants
that the mediator believes is unconscionable” (OMITTED). The section also provided that the mediator should assist the
parties to assess further process options in taking the matter forward. This provision is similar to s 5.3 of the new PS. Commentary: s 5 Conducting mediation: Suspending or terminating
New PS s 5
Under the old PS, the topic of suspension or termination of the mediation was dealt with in s 11. Although there is some
difference in the wording, the essence of the statement of principle from s 11 and most of ss 11.1 and 11.2 of the old PS
have been retained in s 5.1 of the new PS. The terms of s 5.1 are sufficiently general to allow mediators to terminate
or suspend the mediation whenever they are of the view that continuation might “harm or prejudice one or more of the
participants”, or one or more of the participants is acting in bad faith or otherwise misusing the mediation or the usefulness
of mediation has been exhausted. Section 5.1 does not tell mediators to be alert to situations where a participant seeks “to misuse the mediation process” (see
s 11.1) but this is surely a precursor to a mediator suspending or terminating the mediation under s 5.1 of the new PS. 123
Like the original, the new provision does not define the term “good faith” (or its absence, ie “bad faith”). Historically,
these terms have been difficult to define, although some common themes of what it means to act in good faith (or bad
faith) have been discerned. There appears to be wide agreement that good faith includes some preparation, attendance
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...