However, it would be
preferable if the matter was clarified. New PS s 8.6
The closest provision to s 8.6 of the new PS is that of s 6.6 of the old PS which enabled the mediator, with the participants'
consent, to discuss the mediation process with the participants' lawyers and other expert advisers where those advisers
had not attended the mediation. Clearly this provision has implications for the confidentiality of the mediation – hence its
location under the provisions on confidentiality in the old PS. The language of the new provision is a little vague, eg what
does “liaise” mean? What can the mediator “liaise” about? These gaps could be filled in by the drafters. New PS s 8.7
The old PS had a separate section dealing with “Inter-professional relations” (s 8). Section 8.1 was very general, providing
that mediators “should promote cooperation with other professionals”. The term “cooperation” was not defined and
its meaning is debatable. Some common threads of what it means to cooperate can be gleaned from legislation which
now regulates the pre-action conduct of the parties and their advisers. For instance, s 4 of the Civil Dispute Resolution
Act 2011 (Cth) provides examples of steps “that could be taken by a person as part of taking genuine steps to resolve a
dispute”. 46 They include notifying the other person of the issues that are, or may be, in dispute and offering to discuss
them, with a view to resolving the dispute; providing relevant information and documents to the other person; agreeing
on a particular person to facilitate the process; attending the process, and attempting to negotiate. Whatever the term
meant, it was a duty which extended to, eg judicial registrars and court/tribunal staff, all of whom might be regarded as
“professionals”. The duty imposed by s 8.7 of the new PS, that of “professional courtesy”, only applies to “professionals engaged by the
participants”. It is a limited duty and it applies to a very limited group of persons. Courtesy is not defined in the PS but it is
not a new concept for lawyers who owe duties of fairness and courtesy to everyone with whom they engage in the course
of legal practice. 47 It may be that the courts would treat the concept as one which depended on the specific circumstances
of each case. 48 In the future, this area (ie relationships with other professionals), should be extended, eg to cover court and
tribunal staff, and some idea of what “courtesy” might entail could be added. 134
New PS
9 Confidentiality
9.1: “A mediator must respect the agreed confidentiality arrangements relating to participants and to information provided
during the mediation, except:”
(a) “with the consent of the participant” to whom the duty is owed; or
(b) where the information, which will be non-identifying, is required for research, supervisory or educational
purposes; or
(c) “when required to do otherwise by law”;
(d) where “permitted to do otherwise by ethical guidelines or obligations”;
(e) where “reasonably considered necessary to do otherwise to prevent an actual or potential threat to human
life or safety” (cf s 6.1 of the old PS). 9.2: Before holding separate sessions, the mediator “must inform participants of the confidentiality which applies to these
sessions” (cf s 6.4 of the old PS).