This section of the
old PS allowed for the diversity of mediation practice to a far greater extent than is the case under the new PS. Although the new definition of mediation in s 2.2 highlights “self-determination”, it does not explain what the term means
(neither was there a full explanation of the concept in the old PS, although ss 2.5 and 2.6 were on point). More information
on this concept could be given in the PS. For more clarification on the meaning of self-determination, it is necessary to
draw on the work of various scholars (see the explanations given in relation to s 7.4 of the old PS). Provisions omitted from old PS s 2
Section 2.1 of the old PS had other positive features:
• It stopped short of describing mediation as an interest-based process. This better allowed for diversity in mediation
practice. Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 8
• It allowed for the fact that mediation might be used to make “decisions about future actions and outcomes”. This
reference has been omitted from the new PS. As discussed above, mediation is not just a dispute resolution process
and this should be reflected in the Standards. 118
Section 2.2 of the old PS has been omitted from s 2 of the new PS. Consideration should be given to replacing it. All
participants need to understand:
(1) What mediation is not, eg it is not counselling. (2) That mediation is not appropriate for all disputes or for all disputants. The reference to suitability in s 3.2(a)
of the new PS is not sufficient. Section 2.3 of the old PS has also been omitted. At least three points have been lost as a result. First, participants can
negotiate about what they want to achieve out of mediation; second, the goal of mediation need not be to reach a final
agreement about a dispute (eg the parties might agree to a pattern of communication for the future), and three, the
participants might give consideration to the interests of third parties. Ultimately, the omission of this section may decrease
the parties' sense of self-determination.