18
7.3: “Mediators should be competent and have the capacity to apply knowledge, skills and an ethical understanding and
commitment in the areas listed below” (cf ss 8.1 and 10.1 of the new PS). 132
8 Inter-professional relations
Statement of principle: “Mediators should respect the relationships with professional advisers, other mediators and experts
which complement their practice of mediation”. OMITTED
8.1: Mediators should “promote cooperation with other professionals and encourage clients to use other professional
resources when appropriate” (cf 8.7 of the new PS). The underlined portion has been OMITTED.8.2: This section
contemplated the situation where there was more than one dispute resolution process being used for a particular dispute
and encouraged mediators to keep themselves informed and to inform other professionals about the processes taking place. 9 Procedural fairness
9.6: This section provided that participants should be encouraged “to obtain independent professional advice or
information” where appropriate but, in accordance with s 5.3, the mediator should provide several alternatives in
recommending referrals to avoid a conflict of interest or bias or the potential for such (cf ss 3.2(f) and 8.5 of the new PS). Commentary: s 8 Ethical conduct and professional relations
New PS s 8
Section 8 of the new PS is somewhat of a grab-bag of provisions taken from ss 5-9 of the old PS. New PS s 8.1
Mediators owe the participants a duty of competence. A “duty of competence” may be defined in a general way as a duty
to apply and integrate knowledge, skills, values and attitudes in such a way as to effectively perform the tasks required of a
mediator. 42
New PS s 8.2
The wording of s 8.2 of the new PS (prohibiting use of information obtained in mediation for personal gain) is wider than
that used in s 5.4 of the old PS (prohibiting use of information “about participants”) and is to be preferred. New PS s 8.3
Many mediators are members of a primary profession, eg they are lawyers, social workers, counsellors, engineers and
so on. Section 8.3 (and s 5.7 of the old PS) means, for example, that a lawyer mediator must comply with the solicitors'
or barristers' rules of professional conduct, as relevant. It suggests that those professional conduct rules are to prevail in
the event of conflict with the PS (how else can the lawyer “adhere” to them) but it would be preferable if s 8.3 made this
explicit. 43
New PS s 8.4
Section 8.4 of the new PS provides a rare mention of the interests of other stakeholders. Some commentators argue that
more weight should be given to the interests of persons who are not parties to the mediation but are nonetheless affected by
its outcome. 44 There is no consensus on this matter at the current time, although some insights can be gained from relevant
literature. 45
133
New PS s 8.5
Some commentators have expressed concern over s 8.5 of the new PS for it appears to preclude a mediator from making
any recommendations about the use of other named service providers. Section 5.3 of the old PS allowed mediators to
recommend specific service providers so long as several alternatives were given. One might argue that if the mediator
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 19
gives the participants a list of several service providers, he or she is not actually recommending “the services of particular
individuals or firms” such that the practice permitted under s 5.3 could continue under the new s 8.5.