Confidentiality
One of the most troubling gaps in the new PS concerns the issue of confidentiality in mediation. There are three main problem
areas. First, it is generally accepted that mediators owe the participants a duty of confidentiality. This duty may arise from
contract or legislative provision. The PS should be another source of the duty – the PS should provide that mediators owe the
participants a duty of confidentiality in regard to information arising in connection with the mediation subject to stipulated
exceptions. Second, for the reasons discussed above (see the discussion on ss 9.1 and 3.2(b) of the new PS), mediators should
be required to personally explain to the participants, before commencing the mediation, the requirements of confidentiality and
its exceptions. It is an unsafe practice for mediators to rely on intake officers to explain these matters (and in any event, the
PS do not explicitly require intake officers to explain about the exceptions to confidentiality). Third, the standards should offer
some guidance to mediators who are subpoenaed or otherwise required to testify or produce documents in court. The new PS
are silent on this matter. Accountability, professional conduct and integrity
Absence of clear definitions of terms such as “good faith” and “cooperation” is problematic. It is not a new problem. The new
PS have introduced more uncertain terms, eg what do the terms “professional conduct” and “integrity” mean and require from
a mediator? If mediators are accountable, to whom are they accountable and for what? How does integrity differ from honesty,
if at all? Mediators orchestrate the flow of communication in mediation. They are skilled in directing the flow of communication using
techniques such as reframing and questioning. It is important therefore to ascertain whether or not mediators owe a duty of
honesty (aside from the very limited duty to be honest when advertising and promoting mediation services). As to whether
mediators owe a duty of honesty in relation to other matters, the PS are silent. The PS are also silent on whether or not mediators
owe a duty of candour. Other questions flow from this, eg: To whom are these duties owed,
145
if they exist, and in relation to what information?