138
Commentary: s 10 Knowledge, skills and ethical principles
New PS s 10.1
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 23
This commentary focuses on the ethical aspects of mediation practice. Section 10.1 states that mediators must have
“an understanding of the ethical principles” outlined in that section. Section 7.3 of the old PS used slightly different
terminology, requiring mediators to have “an ethical understanding and commitment” in the listed areas. Although the
difference may be slight, ideally mediators should understand and commit to the various ethical principles. Section 7.3 of the old PS emphasised that the lists of required competences were not exhaustive by using the terms
“including” and “including, but not limited to”. While the last phrase sounds like legalese, it should be imported into
the new PS. Without this phrase or something similar, the new PS gives the impression that the listed knowledge, skills
and ethical principles are exhaustive when they cannot be, given that the PS are minimum standards and that no set of
standards can capture all the ethical complexities of mediation. There are a number of significant changes to the list of ethical principles required of mediators. The most obvious change
is that the reference to “neutrality” has been removed from the list of ethical principles. This is not a surprise and hardly
ground-breaking for the concept of mediator neutrality has come under intense scrutiny in recent years 49 and reference
to it has disappeared from popular definitions of mediation. 50 There is growing recognition that mediators cannot be
neutral if “neutrality” is taken to mean disinterest in the outcome of a dispute and absence of influence over the outcome of
mediation. 51
The reference to “Fiduciary obligations” has also been deleted from the list of ethical principles. The debate on this
issue continues, with some commentators claiming that it is only a matter of time before mediators are held to stand as
fiduciaries in some respects. 52 Recently, some authors have argued that the ethical paradigm underpinning mediation
should be changed from neutrality to one based on trust. 53 If this is the case, one would have expected the reference to
fiduciary obligations to remain. Some concepts have been added to the list in s 10.1(c) of the new PS but for the most part, they are not new to mediation,
eg mediators have always owed a duty of competence to the participants, and it makes sense to include “competence” as
an ethical principle. Self-determination and informed consent, which have also been added to the list, are also familiar
concepts in mediation. Self-determination is widely recognised as a central value of mediation.