Again, these matters can at least be flagged in the PS and mediators can be trained to raise the matter with
the mediation participants in a non-coercive and non-directive manner. It is a pity that less attention seems to be given to the
matter in the new PS. More gaps: Lack of guidance in dealing with ethical dilemmas
Failure to alert practitioners to the potential for conflict of objectives and values
The mediation community has been debating some of the issues mentioned above, eg as to whether or not mediators are
responsible for outcome fairness, for many years without achieving consensus. When a mediator intervenes in any of the
circumstances discussed above, there is a possibility that his or her actions will be in contravention of certain of the ethical
principles enshrined in the PS. For example, if the mediator gives “information” or “advice” to an unrepresented party in an
attempt to
146
address a perceived power imbalance, the mediator may be acting contrary to the principle of impartiality. These matters cannot
be determinatively answered in the PS but the PS can at least prepare mediators for the potential for conflict. Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 30
First, mediators must be made aware of the various objectives and values claimed for mediation. The relevant objectives
include: 65 dispute resolution according to standards agreed by the parties, satisfaction of individual interests or needs, party
empowerment, mutually acceptable outcomes which are also fair and stable, outcomes which represent the best alternatives
available (or Pareto optimal solutions) and maximisation of joint gains, enhanced relationships (or at least, minimisation of
damage to relationships), increased access to a “higher quality justice” (ie justice that is responsive to individual needs and
reflective of the preferences of the parties), efficiency and effectiveness. The values of mediation include:66 party participation
and autonomy; self-determination; informed consent; process fairness; and mediator impartiality. Failure to prioritise various objectives and values
The PS do not indicate which objective and value, if any, is paramount in the event of conflict (eg in the way that standards
for lawyers prioritise the duty owed to the courts and the administration of justice). There does seem to be wide agreement that
self-determination is the central value of mediation, but the answer cannot be as simple as this for we recognise that parties are
not entitled to have it anyway they want it – ie there are limits. Other values have to be weighed into the mix. In reality, it is difficult to prioritise the objectives and values underlying mediation because the priority afforded to them differs
depending on whether one is looking at the issue from the perspective of society, individual disputants, the service provider,
and the individual mediator – all of whom may select some objectives and values over others. 67 Mediators need to be aware
of the range of objectives and values at stake in a given mediation so that they can weigh up the alternative courses of action
open to them and arrive at a decision that they can justify, if need be. Failure to guide mediators through an ethical evaluation process
One of the most important functions of standards of professional conduct is to assist members of the relevant professional group
to recognise and respond appropriately to ethical dilemmas. Mediators will often find themselves confronted with an ethical
dilemma. An ethical dilemma arises when there is a “[c]hoice of competing values (ideas of goodness)” 68 which suggests “a
variety of alternative and contradictory courses of action”. 69
However, standards of conduct are limited in their capacity to provide practitioners with “right” answers for every dilemma
that they may face.