142
Old PS
13 Making public statements and promotion of services
Statement of principle: “The mediator should ensure that public statements made by the mediator promoting business are
accurate”. Section 12 of the new PS has a similar flavour. 13.1: The purpose of public statements concerning mediation processes should be to:
(a) educate the public about the process in order to help the public make informed judgments and choices; and
(b) present the mediation process objectively, as one which seeks to empower participants directly and
constitutes only one of several methods for arriving at an outcome
(emphasis added). OMITTED
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 26
13.2: Mediators are prohibited from misleading or deceiving the public when making statements about mediation and
promoting services. OMITTED however see 10.1(c)(viii) of the new PS. 13.3: When advertising professional services, mediators should restrict themselves to matters which educate and inform the
public. OMITTED
13.4: Where possible, mediators should “encourage and/or participate in research that can support further professional and
public education”. OMITTED
13.5: This provision enabled mediators to promote their accreditation under the NMAS. Commentary: s 12 Provision of information and promotion of services
New PS s 12
The new provision (s 12) does nothing to further the cause in having mediation accepted as a profession devoted to public
service. In particular, the following points have been lost from s 13 of the old PS:
1. The old standards seemed more concerned with the profession's relationship with the public, with multiple
references to educating the public about mediation and representing mediation accurately and objectively so
that the public could make informed choices about dispute resolution processes (see eg ss 13.1, 13.3, 13.4). 2. Importantly, the only reference in the PS to “empowerment” of the participants through mediation (see s
13.1(b) of the old PS) has been omitted. 3. The sense of mediation being used for public service has been lost. Mediators are no longer encouraged to
participate in research “that can support further professional and public education” (see s 13.4). New PS
13 Waiver by MSB
In exceptional circumstances the MSB may, conditionally or otherwise, waive compliance with any provision of the
Practice Standards on application by a RMAB. There does not appear to be an equivalent provision in the old PS.