113
Commentary: s 1 Application
New PS s 1.1
This section has been whittled down to a single short sentence, namely that “the PS apply to NMAS accredited mediators”. Much of the information contained in s 1.1 of the old PS has been omitted (see the discussion below). New PS s 1.2
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 5
Section 1.2(a) draws on ss 1.2(a) and 1.4 of the old PS. It makes clear that the PS are the “minimum practice and
competency requirements” of a NMAS accredited mediator (emphasis added). However, that these are minimum standards
is at odds with s 10, which appears to give an exhaustive account of the knowledge, skills and ethical responsibilities of
mediators. (It is not s 1.2 but rather s 10 which needs to be changed). Section 1.2(b) is at the heart of the section – the principal purpose of the PS appears to be educative in nature, ie informing
participants “and others” about what they can expect of the process and of mediators. While that is the stated purpose of
the PS, many of the provisions appear to be written for mediators and not for “others”. For example, it might be difficult
for an unrepresented first-time participant of mediation to understand the provisions of ss 2.1 and 2.2 of the new PS (see
below). Section 1.2(c) picks up the provisions of s 1.3 of the old PS (there being no s 1.2(c) in the old PS). It is straightforward. It
emphasises the fact that the NMAS is a voluntary accreditation system and that persons who become accredited must be
prepared to comply with the Approval Standards as well as the PS. New PS s 1.3
The terms of s 1.3 of the new PS are almost identical to those of s 1.5 of the old PS. If there is an inconsistency between
the PS and relevant legislative provisions pursuant to which a mediator is engaged (eg such as those pertaining to family
law, or to civil procedure law in many jurisdictions),16 the legislative provisions will prevail. Provisions omitted from old PS s 1
There are a number of important provisions that have been jettisoned from s 1.1 of the old PS. These provisions
communicated to all stakeholders, from the very first paragraph, a clear statement as to who the PS applied to, a definition
of mediation, a sense of the purpose of mediation and of the role of a mediator, all conveyed in easy to understand terms
and without any need to cross-reference to other sections. The new PS do deal with the role of a mediator, both in Part
I and also in ss 2.1 and 2.2, but the terms used might be difficult for some people to understand (see the discussion
pertaining to s 2). Section 1.1 of the old PS clearly specified the relationships the PS were intended to govern.