The person conducting
the intake or preliminary session may not mention the exceptions, a state of affairs which may be unknown to the mediator. The mediator no longer has an obligation to inform the participants about confidentiality (and its exceptions) before or
during the mediation process – other than to inform them about the confidentiality that applies if separate sessions are held
(s 9.2). There is another minor change of note: s 6.4 of the old PS appeared to give participants the opportunity to discuss and
agree upon the obligation of confidentiality attached to separate sessions. Section 9.2 of the new PS appears to give the
mediator the power to decide on the issue. It is possible that a mediator might say “nothing will be confidential unless
you tell me it is to be treated as confidential” or “the only thing that is confidential is this …” Given that one of the stated
objectives of the PS is to achieve some level of consistency, it might have been better to regard everything said or done in a
separate session as confidential subject to specified exceptions. 136
New PS
10 Knowledge, skills and ethical principles
10.1: A mediator, consistent with the Approval Standards, must have the knowledge and skills, and an understanding of the
ethical principles, outlined below. Three separate lists are given, the first for knowledge, the second for skills and the third for ethical principles. The
expression “including, but not limited to” is not used at the beginning of the lists (as it was in s 7.3 of the old PS). The areas of knowledge listed in s 10.1(a) are much the same as those listed in s 7.3(a). Of note, item (x) has been changed
such that mediators are now required to have knowledge about “the law relevant to mediators and to the mediation
process” (cf s 7.3(a)(x) which required mediators to have knowledge relating to: “The law of mediation on confidentiality,
enforceability of mediated agreements and liability of mediators”). The terms of the new provision are wider. There have been some changes to the list of skills. Some have disappeared from the Standards, eg s 7.3(b)(vi) “Mediator
interventions appropriate for standard difficulties in mediation” has been OMITTED. Others have been added, see eg
s 10.1(b)(viii) “reality-testing proposed outcomes in light of participants' interests, issues, underlying needs and long-
term viability”.10.1(c): lists the “ethical principles” with respect to which a mediator must have an “understanding”. The
following are listed:
(i) competence, integrity and accountability
(ii) professional conduct
(iii) self-determination
(iv) informed consent
(v) safety, procedural fairness and equity in mediation including withdrawing from or terminating the mediation
process
(vi) impartiality including the avoidance of conflicts of interest
(vii) confidentiality privacy and reporting obligations
(viii) honesty in the marketing and advertising of mediation and promotion of the mediator's practice. 10.2: Where a mediator uses a blended process such as advisory or evaluative mediation or conciliation, which involves the
provision of advice (emphasis added), the mediator must: obtain the consent of the participants; ensure that he or she has
current knowledge and experience; hold relevant professional registration and indemnity insurance; and “ensure that the
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 22
advice is provided in a manner that maintains and respects the principle of self-determination” (s 10.2(c) of the new PS, cf
s 10.5 of the old PS). 137
Old PS
Section 10 of the new PS draws on ss 7 and 10 of the old PS. 7 Competence
Statement of principle: “Mediators must be competent and have relevant skills and knowledge”.