18 There is no doubt that the word “neutrality” has been deleted from the list of ethical
competences or understandings required by a mediator (see s 10.1(c)) and that participant “self-determination” is now an
explicit part of the definition of mediation in s 2.2. While there is some debate over the values that underpin mediation,
there is wide agreement that “self-determination” is its central value. 19 Consequently, both of these revisions improve the
PS (the current thinking in relation to neutrality is discussed later in connection with s 10.1). But it is important to note
that a focus on self-determination as a value of mediation, perhaps even the central value, is not new. There were multiple
provisions in the old PS which emphasised the value of self-determination (see, eg ss 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 9.7, 9.8 and 10.1). There is a potential problem with the remaining parts of the definition of mediation in s 2.2. It describes only one model
of mediation (ie a facilitative model) 20 when several other models have been identified in the literature. For example,
Boulle identifies four paradigm models – the settlement, facilitative, therapeutic and evaluative models 21 (but he is at
pains to point out that these models are not distinct alternatives to one another). 22 The definition in s 2 is based on twin
assumptions: first, that facilitative interest-based mediation is, if not the single correct model of mediation, then at least the
more ethical model; 23 and second, that all mediators use this model (and if they do not, then they should be encouraged to
do so). Both of these assumptions are flawed. As to the first, the fact that different models have been identified highlights
the lack of consensus by mediation practitioners and scholars over the “correct” model/s, and associated objectives, values
and practices. No one model of mediation is more ethical than another. As to the second assumption, research suggests that
the majority of mediators use more than one approach in a single mediation and sometimes, even in a single meeting with
the parties. 24 Few mediators use an approach which is purely facilitative. When the definition of mediation as it stands in s 2.2 is read in conjunction with the application section in Part 1, it
appears that the Standards only apply when a mediator uses a facilitative model (or alternatively, when he or she uses a
recognised hybrid model, eg legal aid conferencing, or a blended model as contemplated under s 10.2 of the PS). Given
the reality of practice, many mediations will not be covered by the definition in s 2 – in other words, the Standards appear
to be extremely limited in their application. They may not apply to mediators (and participants) who use more than one
approach, or to mediators who are settlement-oriented and rights-based in their approach; or to those mediators who favour
transformative mediation. (It is worth remembering that the parties may determine which approach is used and they may
resist all attempts by the mediator to turn them from a rights-based approach to an interest-based one.) This uncertainty did
not arise under the old PS. 117
The relevant section of the old PS (ie the first sentence of s 1.1) was general in its approach to the application of the
Standards – it did not target a specific model of mediation. The old PS purported to apply to “any mediator acting as a third
party to support two or more individuals or entities to manage, settle or resolve disputes, or to form a future plan of action
through a process of mediation and who voluntarily decides to become accredited” under this Scheme.