Under the new PS, participants must be advised “about the NMAS and how it can be accessed” (s 3.2(d)). It
appears that it is then left up to the participants to find their way to the Standards. The provision would benefit from a clear
statement instructing mediators to provide participants with a copy of the Standards. In this respect, the old PS is better –
participants must be helped to get access to these Standards (compare s 3.2(d) of the new PS with s 3.6 of the old PS). Other provisions omitted from old PS s 3
A number of other important provisions from s 3 of the old PS have been omitted. They are discussed in turn below. Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 10
The first sentence of s 3.1 of the old PS, which emphasised the diversity of mediation practice and the variety of ways in
which mediation might come about, has been omitted. This is useful information for participants. Under s 3.2 of the old PS, participants had to be given an opportunity to agree about the way in which the mediation was
conducted. This might extend to agreeing on procedural rules and the format of mediation (eg as to whether joint and
separate sessions were used, or whether it should proceed as a shuttle mediation). This provision has been OMITTED. The
participants have lost an opportunity to have input into the process. The new PS do not contain any provisions equivalent to s 3.4 of the old PS and as a result, several important provisions
have been lost. They are:
1. Section 3.4 required the mediator to “describe and explain the mediation process that is to be used”. This
sounds as though the mediator had to explain his or her own particular approach rather than providing a
general “description of mediation and the steps involved” (s 3.1(a) of the new PS). 2. The mediator had to discuss the appropriateness of mediation, its benefits and risks, and the alternatives
open to the particular participants in the particular circumstances.