Mediation is not counselling and it is not the occasion for obtaining legal advice, a point emphasised in s 2.2
of the old PS. 5. There is less emphasis now on self-determination of the participants. The old PS contained multiple provisions
which emphasised self-determination (see eg ss 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 9.7, 9.8 and 10.1). There appears to be a single
reference to self-determination in the new PS (see s 2.2). 6. The parties' ability to have input into the process by which they resolve their differences has been reduced. Under
the old PS, the parties could negotiate what they wanted to achieve out of mediation (see, eg s 2.3 of the old
PS), and they were to be given an opportunity to agree about the way in which the mediation was conducted
(see s 3.2 of the old PS). 7. The only provision on empowerment of participants (s 13.1 of the old PS) has been omitted. 8. It is not clear what relationships the new PS are intended to cover, eg mediator and parties, mediator and judges/
court officials. 9. There has been a noticeable loss of concern for others not a party to the mediation but nonetheless affected by
it (see, eg ss 2.3, 2.4(g) and 9.7 of the old PS which have been omitted). As has been noted above in the commentary, there are some provisions in the new PS which might be better worded. The
following matters need to be clarified:
• Mediators should help participants to get access to the standards (compare s 3.2(d) of the new PS with s 3.6 of the old PS). • Mediators need to be alert to pre-existing power imbalances, as well as to changes in the balance that may occur during
mediation (see s 6.1 of the new PS). • The wording of s 7.1, which gives a partial definition of “impartial”, might be amended to include bias by “word” as well
as bias by “action” and to extend the provision to a perception of bias, as well as actual bias. • The additional criteria listed in s 9.7 of the old PS (for assessing any proposed agreement) might be added to s 7.7 of the new
PS. These are important criteria which highlight two of mediation's strongest features – it can produce outcomes that are
different from those which might be delivered by a court; and it can produce outcomes which the parties consider to be fair.