They may give advice providing the terms of s 10.2 are fulfilled. 119
New PS
3 Conducting mediation: Preliminary conference or intake
3.1: A mediator must, in a preliminary conference or intake session, ensure that participants are provided with: “(a)
a description of mediation and the steps involved including the use of joint sessions, separate sessions and shuttle
negotiations; (b) information on how to provide feedback or lodge a formal complaint in relation to the mediator” (cf
statement of principle for s 3, and ss 3.2, 3.4 and 6 of the old PS). 3.2: Sets out tasks which might be undertaken in the preliminary conference or intake session including: (a) “assessing
whether mediation is suitable”; (b) “explaining to participants the nature and content of any agreement or requirement to
enter into mediation including confidentiality, costs and how they are to be paid”; (c) identifying who is participating; (f)
referring participants to other sources of information, advice or support; and (g) informing “participants about their roles
and those of advisors, support persons, interpreters and any other attendees” (cf ss 3.3 and 3.4 of the old PS). As was the case under the old PS, someone other than the mediator may conduct the preliminary conference or intake
session (s 3.1) (cf s 3.2 of the old PS). Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 9
Old PS
3 Starting a mediation process
Statement of principle: “Before mediating, a mediator should ensure that an outline of the mediation process has been
given to the participants”. This statement has been subsumed within the provisions of s 3.1 of the new PS. 3.1: “The diversity in mediation practice means that there are considerable differences in terms of how participants
enter into a mediation process”. OMITTED3.2: “Prior to the mediation taking place, the mediator will ensure that the
participants have been provided with an explanation of the process and have had an opportunity to reach agreement about
the way in which the process is to be conducted”. OMITTED.3.3: Sets out some of the possible objectives of an intake
process, such as: (a) determining whether mediation is appropriate; (b) assisting participants to prepare for the process;
(c) ensuring that every participant receives information about the roles of each party in the mediation; and (g) settling
venue and timing issues.3.4: Listed things that the mediator should do in intake or during the mediation including: (a)
“describe and explain the mediation process that is to be used”; (b) discuss the appropriateness of the process, its benefits
and risks, in the light of the participants' particular circumstances; (c) “discuss the confidentiality of the mediation and
any limitations on such confidentiality”; (f) explain indemnity provisions contained in any agreement to mediate; (g)
advise participants of the mediator's role in relation to the provision of advice or other services; and (h)(ii) advise “how
participants may seek information and advice from a variety of sources during the process”. The underlined provisions
have been OMITTED. 3.5: Encouraged the participants to enter into a written mediation agreement.