Ultimately, a mediator may have no choice but to suspend
or terminate the mediation. Other provision omitted from old PS s 4
The statement of principle from s 4 of the old PS has been omitted. Since the training requirements (including training to
recognise and handle power imbalances) are canvassed in the separate NMAS Approval Standards, this omission does not
seem problematic. New PS
7 Procedural fairness and impartiality
7.1: “A mediator must conduct the mediation in a fair, equitable and impartial way, without favouritism or bias in act or
omission” (cf statement of principle from ss 5, 5.1 and statement of principle from s 9 of the old PS). 7.2: “A mediator must identify and disclose any potential grounds of bias or conflict of interest before the mediation, or
that emerge at any time during the process” (emphasis added) (cf ss 5.1 and 5.2 of the old PS). 7.3: “A mediator must not mediate in cases involving a conflict of interest without the informed consent of the
participants”, and then only if the mediator believes that the conflict will not impair his or her impartial conduct of the
mediation (cf s 5.1 of the old PS). 7.4: “A mediator must support participants to reach agreements freely, voluntarily, without undue influence and on the
basis of informed consent” (cf s 9.1 of the old PS). 7.5: “A mediator must provide participants appropriate opportunities to speak to and be heard by one another in the
mediation, and to articulate their respective interests, issues and underlying needs” (cf s 9.2 of the old PS). 7.6: “A mediator must ensure, as far as practicable, that participants have had sufficient time and opportunity to access
sources of advice or information necessary for their decision-making” (cf s 9.5 of the old PS). 7.7: “A mediator must encourage and support negotiations that focus on the participants' respective interests, issues and
underlying needs and must encourage participants to assess any proposed agreements accordingly and with reference to
their long-term viability” (the closest point of comparison is ss 9.4 and 9.7 of the old PS). 126
Old PS
Section 7 of the new PS draws on ss 5 and 9 of the old PS. 5 Impartial and ethical practice
Statement of principle: “A mediator must conduct the dispute resolution process in an impartial manner and adhere to
ethical standards of practice”. Some of this provision has been taken up in s 7.1 of the new PS.5.1: Defined “impartiality”
to mean “freedom from favouritism or bias either in word or action, or the omission of word or action, that might give
the appearance of such favouritism or bias.” OMITTED but see s 7.1 of the new PS.Further s 5.1 required mediators to
disclose actual and potential grounds of bias and conflicts of interest. It also provided that mediators could continue the
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 14
mediation with “an informed waiver” by the parties and if the mediator was of the view that his or her impartiality was not
impaired (cf ss 7.2 - 7.3 of the new PS). 5.2: “A mediator should identify and disclose any potential grounds of bias or conflict of interest that emerge at any time in
the process”. They should take reasonable steps to minimise the chances of being in a position of potential bias or conflict. If there is a potential conflict, mediators should disclose it as soon as possible and preferably before mediation commences. OMITTED but see s 7.2 of the new PS.