7 In the author's opinion, this claim is overstated. There are a number of gaps and uncertainties in the revised Practice
Standards. In many ways, as this article seeks to demonstrate, the original Practice Standards better fulfilled the functions
normally served by standards of conduct of a profession. Those functions include: 8
• informing mediators of the standards of service required of them;
• inculcating in mediators the values considered intrinsic to mediation practice;
• informing users, potential users and members of the public of the standards of service they can expect of mediators;
• alerting mediators and other participants to the ethical dilemmas likely to arise in mediation practice and providing them
with guidance on “ethical” responses to those dilemmas; and
• fostering pride and public respect for the profession. The article compares and contrasts the revised Practice Standards issued in 2015 (new PS) with the Practice Standards as they
stood at March 2012 (old PS). It also provides a detailed section-by-section commentary on the new PS and, more generally,
on mediator standards of conduct. It concludes by highlighting uncertainties and gaps in the new PS – all of which point to
a lack of clear specification of the standards of conduct required of mediators. Some suggestions for improving the new PS
are also provided. The article begins with a brief examination of the introductory provisions of the NMAS documentation (ie Part I of the
documentation). Comparison of new and old NMAS PS and a commentary
The new PS must be read in conjunction with the other parts of the Revised NMAS documentation. Part I is particularly
important to the subject matter of this article. It sets out:
1. the purpose of the NMAS;
2. its application;
3. the role of mediators, and
4. the NMAS structure. According to Part I, the purpose of the NMAS is to promote “quality, consistency and accountability of NMAS accredited
mediators within the diversity of mediation practice in Australia. It informs participants in mediation (participants) about what
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 3
they can expect of a NMAS accredited mediator”.