20 The term “facilitative” is not actually used in the section. However, the definition used in the Standards
tracks closely with Folberg and Taylor's early definition of mediation – one which has been described as
facilitative. Folberg and Taylor defined mediation as: “The process by which the participants, together
with the assistance of a neutral person or persons, systematically isolate disputed issues in order to
develop options, consider alternatives, and reach a consensual settlement that will accommodate their
needs”: see J Folberg and A Taylor, Mediation: A Comprehensive Guide to Resolving Conflicts Without
Giving In (Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, 1988) 7. 21 Laurence Boulle, Mediation: Principles, Process, Practice  (LexisNexis Butterworths, 3 rd  ed, 2011)
43-47. Boulle's framework is one of a number of categorisations available. One of the most well-known is
that of Riskin, who classified mediator approaches to mediation by way of a grid consisting of four style
quadrants for facilitative narrow, evaluative narrow, facilitative broad and evaluative broad mediation
styles: see Leonard L Riskin, “ Decisionmaking in Mediation: The New Old Grid and the New New
Grid System” (2003) 79 Notre Dame Law Review 1, 3 . Also see, eg Michal Alberstein who discusses
pragmatic, transformative and narrative models of mediation: Michal Alberstein, “ Forms of Mediation
and Law: Cultures of Dispute Resolution” (2007) 22 Ohio State Journal on Dispute Resolution 321,
325-331. Whether called styles or models, they represent different theories about how mediators should
act in relation to the parties. Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 33
22 Boulle refers to these categories as archetypical models because they are not so much discrete forms
of mediation practice but rather ways of conceptualising the different tendencies in practice: Boulle, n
21, 43. The most heated debate has concerned the appropriateness of “evaluative mediation”, where the
mediator gives the parties an opinion on the likely outcome of court proceedings. 23 Generally, see Bobette Wolski, “The New Limitations of Fisher and Ury's Model of Interest-based
Negotiation: Not Necessarily the Ethical Alternative” (2012) 19 James Cook University Law Review 127.