It
examines first the provision/s of the new PS, followed by the “corresponding” provision/s of the old PS, followed by the author's
commentary on the revisions and on mediator standards generally. These are not official comments released by the NMAS
drafting body (some standards and codes of conduct contain an official commentary following each rule or standard 13 but
that format has not been adopted in the NMAS Practice Standards). There is one change in format which is best noted at the
beginning. The old PS, beginning at s 2, contained a statement of principle (for want of a better phrase) immediately following
the section heading.14 This format has not been retained in the new PS and all statements of principle have been omitted, though
in some instances the content of the statement has been absorbed into the main provisions. The other general comment, an
important one, is that the language of the standards has changed so that practitioners are told that they “must” do such and such,
rather than merely that they “should” do such and such. The new PS are more prescriptive in style.15 In the table which follows,
text from the old PS which has been omitted from the new PS, is underlined and marked as “OMITTED”. This format allows
readers to see, at a glance, the many important provisions that have been deleted from the original PS. 112
NMAS Practice Standards 2015 (new PS), Part III
1 Application
1.1: “The Practice Standards apply to NMAS accredited mediators” (cf s 1.1 of the old PS). 1.2: Sets out the purpose of the PS. It provides as follows:
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 4
1.2(a): The PS “specify the minimum practice and competency requirements of a NMAS accredited mediator” (emphasis
added) (cf s 1.2(a) of the old PS). 1.2(b): The PS “inform participants and others about what they can expect of the mediation process and of a NMAS
accredited mediator” (cf s 1.2(b) of the old PS).