9.3: This section enables the mediator to discuss the mediation and any proposed agreement with a participant's advisors or
with third parties, with the participant's consent (cf ss 6.6 and 6.7 of the old PS). 9.4: Mediators are not required to retain documentation from the mediation (cf s 6.8 of the old PS). Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 20
9.5: Mediators must take care to preserve confidentiality when storing and disposing of documents used or created at the
mediation (cf 6.8 of the old PS). Old PS
6 Confidentiality
Statement of principle: “A mediator should respect the confidentiality of the participants”. OMITTED 6.1: “A mediator
shall not voluntarily disclose to anyone who is not a party to the mediation any information obtained except” … in four
specified circumstances (which are much the same as those provided in s 9.1 of the new PS), including: “(d) where
permitted by existing ethical guidelines or requirements and the information discloses an actual or potential threat to
human life or safety” (emphasis added) (cf s 9.1 of the new PS). The underlined portion has been omitted.6.2: Mediators
had to clarify “the participants' expectations of confidentiality” before the mediation process commenced. OMITTED
from s 9 but see s 3.2(b) of the new PS. The section also provided that any written mediation agreement should include
provisions concerning confidentiality. OMITTED
6.3: Mediators had to inform participants of the limitations of confidentiality before the mediation commenced (the
Standard recognised that the limitations might be statutory, judicially or ethically mandated). OMITTED
6.4: If the mediator held separate sessions with a participant, the obligations of confidentiality regarding these sessions had
to be discussed and agreed upon before the sessions commenced (cf s 9.2 of the new PS). OMITTED
6.5: The essence of this provision was that mediators should not give evidence without an order of the court or tribunal
if the mediator reasonably believed that doing so would violate an obligation of confidentiality (and should inform
participants of the situation as soon as practicable). OMITTED
6.6: Enabled mediators to discuss the mediation process with the participants' advisers with the participants' consent (cf s
9.3 of the new PS). 6.7: Enabled mediators to disclose the substance of any proposed agreement with the participants' respective advisers with
the permission of the participants (see s 9.3 of the new PS). 6.8: Mediators had to maintain confidentiality in storing and disposing of records of the mediation. Mediators were not
required to retain documents (see ss 9.4 and 9.5 of the new PS). 135
Commentary: 9 Confidentiality
New PS s 9
There are two aspects to confidentiality in mediation, the duty owed by the parties to each other and the duty owed by the
mediator to the parties. In each case, the duty may arise by virtue of an agreement to mediate, or a separate confidentiality
agreement, and/or by legislation (see eg the obligations imposed by ss 53 – 54 of Civil Proceedings Act 2011 (Qld)). The
PS can only directly address the duty owed by the mediator to the parties (a duty of confidentiality as between the parties
cannot be imposed by the Standards).