5.3: “A mediator should avoid conflicts of interest, or potential grounds for bias or the perception of a conflict of interest,
in recommending the services of other professionals”. Where possible, the mediator should provide several alternatives if
recommending referrals to other practitioners and services (cf s 8.5 of the new PS). OMITTED
For discussion about ss 5.4 - 5.7 of the old PS, see the discussion on ss 8.2 - 8.3 of the new PS. 9 Procedural fairness
Statement of principle: “A mediator will conduct the mediation process in a procedurally fair manner”. OMITTED but see
s 7.1 of the new PS. 9.1: “A mediator will support the participants to reach any agreement freely, voluntarily, without undue influence, and on
the basis of informed consent” (cf s 7.4 of the new PS). 9.2: “The mediator will provide each participant with an opportunity to speak and to be heard in the mediation, and to
articulate his or her own needs, interests and concerns” (cf s 7.5 of the new PS). 9.3: This section dealt with the situation where a party was unable or unwilling to continue. A similar provision can be
found in s 5.1(a) of the new PS. 9.4: “The mediator should encourage and support balanced negotiations and should understand how manipulative or
intimidating negotiating tactics can be employed by participants”. OMITTED
9.5: The mediator must ensure participants “have sufficient time and opportunity to access sources of advice or
information” in certain circumstances such as where it appears that “a participant needs either additional information or
assistance” (see s 7.6 of the new PS). For s 9.6, see ss 3.2(f) and 8.5 of the new PS. 9.7: “It is a fundamental principle of the mediation process that competent and informed participants can reach an
agreement which may differ from litigated outcomes. The mediator, however, has a duty to support the participants in
assessing the feasibility and practicality of any proposed agreement in both the long and short term, in accordance with
the participant's own subjective criteria of fairness, taking cultural differences and where appropriate, the interests of any
vulnerable stakeholders into account”. OMITTED although some elements are taken up in s 7.7 of the new PS. 9.8: “The primary responsibility for the resolution of a dispute rests with the participants. The mediator will not pressure
participants into an agreement or make a substantive decision on behalf of any participant”. OMITTED
127
Commentary: s 7 Procedural fairness and impartiality
New PS s 7.1
Mediators have long had a duty to conduct mediation in an impartial manner. 33 To meet this requirement, mediators
generally introduce themselves in an equal manner, perform equal non-verbals such as handshaking, address the parties in
a similar manner, sit an equal distance from each party, maintain equal eye contact, give each of the parties equal air time
and so on. If a mediator becomes aware that he or she is starting to dislike a party and/or that party's attitudes, to the extent
that it is interfering with the mediator's conduct of the mediation, most mediators would not continue with the mediation.