They may not apply to mediators (and participants) who use more than one
approach, or to mediators who are settlement-oriented and rights-based in their approach; or to those mediators who favour
transformative mediation. (It is worth remembering that the parties may determine which approach is used and they may
resist all attempts by the mediator to turn them from a rights-based approach to an interest-based one.) This uncertainty did
not arise under the old PS. 117
The relevant section of the old PS (ie the first sentence of s 1.1) was general in its approach to the application of the
Standards – it did not target a specific model of mediation. The old PS purported to apply to “any mediator acting as a third
party to support two or more individuals or entities to manage, settle or resolve disputes, or to form a future plan of action
through a process of mediation and who voluntarily decides to become accredited” under this Scheme. This section of the
old PS allowed for the diversity of mediation practice to a far greater extent than is the case under the new PS. Although the new definition of mediation in s 2.2 highlights “self-determination”, it does not explain what the term means
(neither was there a full explanation of the concept in the old PS, although ss 2.5 and 2.6 were on point). More information
on this concept could be given in the PS. For more clarification on the meaning of self-determination, it is necessary to
draw on the work of various scholars (see the explanations given in relation to s 7.4 of the old PS). Provisions omitted from old PS s 2
Section 2.1 of the old PS had other positive features:
• It stopped short of describing mediation as an interest-based process. This better allowed for diversity in mediation
practice. Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 8
• It allowed for the fact that mediation might be used to make “decisions about future actions and outcomes”.