1.2: Sets out the purpose of the PS. It provides as follows:
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 4
1.2(a): The PS “specify the minimum practice and competency requirements of a NMAS accredited mediator” (emphasis
added) (cf s 1.2(a) of the old PS). 1.2(b): The PS “inform participants and others about what they can expect of the mediation process and of a NMAS
accredited mediator” (cf s 1.2(b) of the old PS). 1.2(c): The PS “should be read in conjunction with the Approval Standards (Part II of the NMAS), with which a NMAS
accredited mediator must also comply” (cf s 1.3 of the old PS). 1.3: “Where a mediator practises under a legislative framework and there is a conflict between a provision of the Practice
Standards and a provision of that framework, the legislative framework will override the Practice Standards to the extent of
any inconsistency” (cf s 1.5 of the old PS). NMAS Practice Standards 2012 (old PS)
1 Application
1.1: The PS purported to apply to “any mediator acting as a third party to support two or more individuals or entities to
manage, settle or resolve disputes, or to form a future plan of action through a process of mediation and who voluntarily
decides to become accredited under the National Mediator Accreditation Scheme.” It described the mediator's role (and
at the same time, defined mediation) in the following terms: “[a] mediator supports participants in a mediation process
to identify, clarify and explore issues, to generate and consider options and to make decisions about future actions and
outcomes”. OMITTED (although some of this material is included in ss 2.1 and 2.2 of the new PS). 1.1: Further provided that the Standards “are intended to govern the relationship of mediators with the participants in
the mediation, their professional colleagues, courts and the general public so that all will benefit from high standards of
practice in mediation”. OMITTED
1.2: Sets out the purpose of the PS. 1.2(a): Provided that the PS specified “practice and competency requirements for mediators”. That these were to be
regarded as “minimum” requirements was set out in s 1.4 of the old PS as mentioned below. 1.2(b): Stated that the PS “inform participants and others about what they can expect of the mediation process and
mediators”. 1.3: Provided that mediators who were voluntarily accredited under this scheme “must comply with the Approval
Standards as well as the Practice Standards” and that the two sets of standards were to be read together. 1.4: Informed the reader that: “[t]here are a range of different mediation models in use across Australia”; mediation can
take place in a variety of settings and may be used in a wide range of disputes; mediators come from diverse backgrounds
and disciplines; mediation can be used where there is conflict or to support future decision-making; mediation may
take place as a result of court or tribunal referral, as part of community schemes, or by private referral; depending on
the context, mediators might have to comply with additional requirements; mediators may practise alone or with a co-
mediator. Also, this provision established that the PS set out minimum practice requirements. The entire paragraph, with
the exception of the reference to “minimum” requirements, has been OMITTED. 1.5: This provision is in substantially the same terms as s 1.3 of the new PS. It governed in the event of inconsistency
between the PS and any legislative framework pursuant to which a mediator practised.