The underlined portion has been omitted.6.2: Mediators
had to clarify “the participants' expectations of confidentiality” before the mediation process commenced. OMITTED
from s 9 but see s 3.2(b) of the new PS. The section also provided that any written mediation agreement should include
provisions concerning confidentiality. OMITTED
6.3: Mediators had to inform participants of the limitations of confidentiality before the mediation commenced (the
Standard recognised that the limitations might be statutory, judicially or ethically mandated). OMITTED
6.4: If the mediator held separate sessions with a participant, the obligations of confidentiality regarding these sessions had
to be discussed and agreed upon before the sessions commenced (cf s 9.2 of the new PS). OMITTED
6.5: The essence of this provision was that mediators should not give evidence without an order of the court or tribunal
if the mediator reasonably believed that doing so would violate an obligation of confidentiality (and should inform
participants of the situation as soon as practicable). OMITTED
6.6: Enabled mediators to discuss the mediation process with the participants' advisers with the participants' consent (cf s
9.3 of the new PS). 6.7: Enabled mediators to disclose the substance of any proposed agreement with the participants' respective advisers with
the permission of the participants (see s 9.3 of the new PS). 6.8: Mediators had to maintain confidentiality in storing and disposing of records of the mediation. Mediators were not
required to retain documents (see ss 9.4 and 9.5 of the new PS). 135
Commentary: 9 Confidentiality
New PS s 9
There are two aspects to confidentiality in mediation, the duty owed by the parties to each other and the duty owed by the
mediator to the parties. In each case, the duty may arise by virtue of an agreement to mediate, or a separate confidentiality
agreement, and/or by legislation (see eg the obligations imposed by ss 53 – 54 of Civil Proceedings Act 2011 (Qld)). The
PS can only directly address the duty owed by the mediator to the parties (a duty of confidentiality as between the parties
cannot be imposed by the Standards).