Who is the obligation owed to? New PS s 10.2
Section 10.2 deals with the topic of information provided by the mediator and blended processes (the old PS contained
a separate section dealing with “information” provided by the mediator, see s 10). Section 10.2 needs to be read with
the proviso to s 2.2. The proviso reads, “[a] mediator does not evaluate or advise on the merits of, or determine the
outcome of, disputes”. There is a footnote in the proviso which refers the reader to s 10.2. This section briefly describes a
blended process as one which involves the “provision of advice” from the mediator (emphasis added). The section allows
a mediator to conduct a blended process when the requirements of the section – which are more extensive than those
required under the old PS, have been satisfied. The requirements are: participants' consent; appropriate qualifications and
professional indemnity held by the mediator; and provision of the advice in a manner which maintains and respects “the
principle of self-determination”. 140
Provisions omitted from old PS s 10
As mentioned, the old PS contained a separate section dealing with “information” provided by the mediator (see s 10). The section needed to be read in conjunction with s 2.6. According to these provisions, mediators could give expert
information, without necessarily turning the process into a blended one, provided: the information was couched in general
and non-prescriptive terms, given at a time when the parties could integrate it into their decision-making, and the parties
gave their consent. The new PS do not appear to allow for the possibility of mediators giving “general expert information”
as opposed to “specific expert advice”. When mediators give information which tends to be specific, eg about the likely
outcome of litigation or the prospects of success at trial, they should ensure that they comply with the more stringent
requirements of s 10.2 of the new PS. This appears to be a positive development aimed at protecting the parties. Many commentators will consider the omission of s 10.4 of the old standards to be a backwards step. Opinions differ
as to the extent to which a mediator is responsible for the interests of third parties not present at the mediation. Some
commentators favour active intervention by the mediator to ensure that the interests of vulnerable third parties are
protected. 56 Other authors take a more moderate approach on this issue. Hyman believes that a mediator should deal with
matters of fairness and justice in mediation but only to a limited extent – in much the same way as lawyers might deal
with moral issues in an interview with a client – by non-directive discussion of fairness and justice issues after which the
parties are free to determine the final outcome. 57 A similar view is expressed by Hughes who suggests that the mediator
should assist the parties to assess any agreement they reach for its fairness and enforceability without the mediator taking
responsibility for the content of the agreement.