New PS s 7.7
Section 7.7 consists of two parts. First, it imposes on mediators an obligation to encourage and support interest-based
negotiation between the participants. There is, it is suggested, a procedural bias towards interest-based negotiations. This bias is of long standing. 39 It is not problematic as long as mediators understand that there are other approaches
to negotiation and in fact, research suggests that positional or distributive negotiation exists to some extent in most
negotiations. 40 Mediators need to be trained in the theory and practices of both approaches; they must be skilled in
responding to both approaches. The second part of s 7.7 of the new PS imposes an obligation on mediators to assist the participants to assess any proposed
agreement by reference to two criteria: (i) by how well it satisfies the interests, issues and needs of the participants; and (ii)
on the basis of long-term viability. There are other criteria which should be taken into account, as discussed next. Provisions omitted from old PS ss 5 and 9
There are some provisions from s 5.2 of the old PS, such as the requirement to minimise the risk of bias or conflict
occurring, which ideally should be included in the Standards. There are, it is suggested, three other omissions from section 7:
1. As mentioned earlier, the opening sentence of s 9.7 of the old PS is critical. It states: “It is a fundamental
principle of the mediation process that competent and informed participants can reach an agreement
which may differ from litigated outcomes”. It is the essence of mediation in many ways and reflects
important mediation values: self-determination, autonomy, informed consent, the potential for participants
in mediation to arrive at decisions that may be different from court outcomes. 130
2. Section 9.7 of the old PS mentioned several other criteria for assessing proposed agreements: short term
viability; “the participant's own subjective criteria of fairness”, taking into account cultural differences;
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 17
and the interests of vulnerable stakeholders. These are important criteria for assessing durability, outcome
fairness and what Fisher and Ury called a “wise agreement”, ie one which takes community standards into
account. 41 These criteria should be included in the PS. 3.