It is a limited duty and it applies to a very limited group of persons. Courtesy is not defined in the PS but it is
not a new concept for lawyers who owe duties of fairness and courtesy to everyone with whom they engage in the course
of legal practice. 47 It may be that the courts would treat the concept as one which depended on the specific circumstances
of each case. 48 In the future, this area (ie relationships with other professionals), should be extended, eg to cover court and
tribunal staff, and some idea of what “courtesy” might entail could be added. 134
New PS
9 Confidentiality
9.1: “A mediator must respect the agreed confidentiality arrangements relating to participants and to information provided
during the mediation, except:”
(a) “with the consent of the participant” to whom the duty is owed; or
(b) where the information, which will be non-identifying, is required for research, supervisory or educational
purposes; or
(c) “when required to do otherwise by law”;
(d) where “permitted to do otherwise by ethical guidelines or obligations”;
(e) where “reasonably considered necessary to do otherwise to prevent an actual or potential threat to human
life or safety” (cf s 6.1 of the old PS). 9.2: Before holding separate sessions, the mediator “must inform participants of the confidentiality which applies to these
sessions” (cf s 6.4 of the old PS). 9.3: This section enables the mediator to discuss the mediation and any proposed agreement with a participant's advisors or
with third parties, with the participant's consent (cf ss 6.6 and 6.7 of the old PS). 9.4: Mediators are not required to retain documentation from the mediation (cf s 6.8 of the old PS). Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 20
9.5: Mediators must take care to preserve confidentiality when storing and disposing of documents used or created at the
mediation (cf 6.8 of the old PS). Old PS
6 Confidentiality
Statement of principle: “A mediator should respect the confidentiality of the participants”. OMITTED 6.1: “A mediator
shall not voluntarily disclose to anyone who is not a party to the mediation any information obtained except” … in four
specified circumstances (which are much the same as those provided in s 9.1 of the new PS), including: “(d) where
permitted by existing ethical guidelines or requirements and the information discloses an actual or potential threat to
human life or safety” (emphasis added) (cf s 9.1 of the new PS).