Three separate lists are given, the first for knowledge, the second for skills and the third for ethical principles. The
expression “including, but not limited to” is not used at the beginning of the lists (as it was in s 7.3 of the old PS). The areas of knowledge listed in s 10.1(a) are much the same as those listed in s 7.3(a). Of note, item (x) has been changed
such that mediators are now required to have knowledge about “the law relevant to mediators and to the mediation
process” (cf s 7.3(a)(x) which required mediators to have knowledge relating to: “The law of mediation on confidentiality,
enforceability of mediated agreements and liability of mediators”). The terms of the new provision are wider. There have been some changes to the list of skills. Some have disappeared from the Standards, eg s 7.3(b)(vi) “Mediator
interventions appropriate for standard difficulties in mediation” has been OMITTED. Others have been added, see eg
s 10.1(b)(viii) “reality-testing proposed outcomes in light of participants' interests, issues, underlying needs and long-
term viability”.10.1(c): lists the “ethical principles” with respect to which a mediator must have an “understanding”. The
following are listed:
(i) competence, integrity and accountability
(ii) professional conduct
(iii) self-determination
(iv) informed consent
(v) safety, procedural fairness and equity in mediation including withdrawing from or terminating the mediation
process
(vi) impartiality including the avoidance of conflicts of interest
(vii) confidentiality privacy and reporting obligations
(viii) honesty in the marketing and advertising of mediation and promotion of the mediator's practice. 10.2: Where a mediator uses a blended process such as advisory or evaluative mediation or conciliation, which involves the
provision of advice (emphasis added), the mediator must: obtain the consent of the participants; ensure that he or she has
current knowledge and experience; hold relevant professional registration and indemnity insurance; and “ensure that the
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 22
advice is provided in a manner that maintains and respects the principle of self-determination” (s 10.2(c) of the new PS, cf
s 10.5 of the old PS). 137
Old PS
Section 10 of the new PS draws on ss 7 and 10 of the old PS.