This wording has been
absorbed into ss 8.1 and 10.1 of the new PS. As to the provisions in ss 7.1-7.2, see s 8.8 of the new PS. 7.3: “Mediators should be competent and have the capacity to apply knowledge, skills and an ethical understanding
and commitment in the areas listed below. Mediators demonstrate competence by showing that they have the requisite
knowledge and skills and can apply them”. The section goes on to say that mediators are required to ensure “ongoing
professional development is focused on achieving and maintaining competencies including (a) KNOWLEDGE in areas
including, but not limited to … (b) SKILLS, including, but not limited to: … and (c) ETHICAL UNDERSTANDINGS in
relation to …”The underlined portions have been OMITTED from s 7.3 of the old PS.Three separate lists were then given,
dealing in turn with knowledge, skills, and ethical understandings. As mentioned above, there have been some minor
changes in the lists of knowledge and skills. Section 7.3(c) provided that mediators should have an ethical understanding in
relation to:
(i) The avoidance of conflicts of interest. (ii) Marketing and advertising of mediation. (iii) Confidentiality, privacy and reporting obligations. (iv) Neutrality and impartiality. (v) Fiduciary obligations. (vi) Supporting fairness and equity in mediation. (vii) Withdrawal from and termination of the mediation process. Section 10 Information provided by the mediator
Statement of principle: “The mediator has no advisory or determinative role in regard to the content of the matter being
mediated or its outcome. The mediator can advise upon and determine the mediation process that is used.” OMITTED
although the proviso to s 2.2 picks up on some of these points.10.1: “Consistent with the standards relating to impartiality
and preserving participant self-determination, a mediator may, with the clearly informed consent of the participants,
provide the participants with information that the mediator is qualified by training or experience to provide. Such
information should be couched in general terms” (emphasis added). OMITTED10.2: “A mediator should only provide
information within the limits of his or her qualifications and competence while conducting a mediation”. 10.3: Mediators should not render assistance of a counselling nature “nor should they provide legal advice”. OMITTED
10.4: “Where appropriate, for example, in some family, environmental and workplace disputes, the mediator has a
responsibility to facilitate a discussion about the participants' awareness of the interests of others affected by the dispute,
and by the proposed agreement, and to assist the participants to consider the separate and individual needs of other such
persons” (emphasis added). OMITTED
10.5: “If a mediator, upon request, uses a ‘blended process’ model, such as evaluative mediation or conciliation”, this
process must be the subject of “clear consent” of the participants.