(vii) Withdrawal from and termination of the mediation process. Section 10 Information provided by the mediator
Statement of principle: “The mediator has no advisory or determinative role in regard to the content of the matter being
mediated or its outcome. The mediator can advise upon and determine the mediation process that is used.” OMITTED
although the proviso to s 2.2 picks up on some of these points.10.1: “Consistent with the standards relating to impartiality
and preserving participant self-determination, a mediator may, with the clearly informed consent of the participants,
provide the participants with information that the mediator is qualified by training or experience to provide. Such
information should be couched in general terms” (emphasis added). OMITTED10.2: “A mediator should only provide
information within the limits of his or her qualifications and competence while conducting a mediation”. 10.3: Mediators should not render assistance of a counselling nature “nor should they provide legal advice”. OMITTED
10.4: “Where appropriate, for example, in some family, environmental and workplace disputes, the mediator has a
responsibility to facilitate a discussion about the participants' awareness of the interests of others affected by the dispute,
and by the proposed agreement, and to assist the participants to consider the separate and individual needs of other such
persons” (emphasis added). OMITTED
10.5: “If a mediator, upon request, uses a ‘blended process’ model, such as evaluative mediation or conciliation”, this
process must be the subject of “clear consent” of the participants. 138
Commentary: s 10 Knowledge, skills and ethical principles
New PS s 10.1
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 23
This commentary focuses on the ethical aspects of mediation practice. Section 10.1 states that mediators must have
“an understanding of the ethical principles” outlined in that section. Section 7.3 of the old PS used slightly different
terminology, requiring mediators to have “an ethical understanding and commitment” in the listed areas.