Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 1
Journal of Civil Litigation and Practice
V olume 5
No 2, 2016
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator Accreditation System Practice Standards
Original author(s): Bobette Wolski*
Last Review: 01/01/2016
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to
the revised National Mediator Accreditation System
Practice Standards
Abstract
This article concerns the National Mediator Accreditation System (NMAS) Practice Standards which were extensively
revised in 2015. According to the Chair of the Mediator Standards Board, the standards now “specify clearly the
minimum practice and competency requirements” for NMAS accredited mediators. The study undertaken in this
article, in which the revised Practice Standards are compared with those that they replace, suggests otherwise. Numerous gaps (for example, as to the mediator's duty of confidentiality) and uncertainties (for example, as to the
meaning of “impartiality”) in the revised standards are identified. The author concludes that the revised standards
provide little guidance to mediators faced with a choice between contradictory courses of action and conflicting
values. The usefulness of the standards as a tool to educate mediators (and to instil in them a sense of the values of
mediation), participants and potential participants has been compromised by the recent revisions. The article offers
possible solutions for overcoming shortcomings in the standards. (2016) 5 JCivLP 109
Introduction
The National Mediator Accreditation System (NMAS) commenced operation in Australia on 1 January 2008. The NMAS is
an industry-based system which relies on voluntary compliance by mediator organisations (known as Recognised Mediator
Accreditation Bodies or RMABs) that agree to accredit mediators in accordance with stipulated NMAS Standards. 1 There are
almost 40 RMABs at the current time. They include courts (the Federal Court of Australia and Supreme Court of Western
Australia) and tribunals (the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal), professional
bodies (most State and Territory law societies and bar associations), mediation agencies (eg Australian Dispute Resolution
Association Inc) and community organisations (eg Relationships Australia and community justice centres in a number of States
and Territories).2
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 2
Two sets of standards were promulgated in connection with the NMAS and came into effect on 1 January 2008: Approval
Standards which specify the qualifications and training requirements for accreditation under the system;3 and Practice Standards
which specify “the minimum practice and competency requirements of a NMAS accredited mediator”. 4 The standards were
subject to minor revision in 2012. They were extensively revised last year, as was the NMAS itself, with the revisions taking
effect from 1 July 2015. The revised Practice Standards are set within the context of a “broader document covering ancillary
aspects of the NMAS”.5 The document includes an introductory section (Part I); more formal provision with respect to RMABs,
including a requirement that they upload to a
110
National Register a list of mediators they have accredited (Part IV); provision with respect to the Register of Nationally
Accredited Mediators (Part V); and a section dealing with membership and responsibilities of the Mediator Standards Board
(MSB) (Part VI) which was established in 2010 to oversee the NMAS.6 The standards sit in the middle of the NMAS document:
the Approval Standards can be found in Part II of the document, while the Practice Standards are in Part III. This article is concerned with the revised Practice Standards for mediators operating under the NMAS. According to the
Chair of the MSB, the revised Practice Standards “ specify clearly the minimum practice and competency requirements for
mediators”.