58 This appears to be the position adopted in relevant mediator standards,
which impose upon mediators duties to help the parties reach a fair and equitable settlement (eg by raising questions as
to the fairness, equity and feasibility of proposed options for settlement) and to ensure consideration of the interests of
vulnerable parties and other affected and absent third persons – while leaving primary responsibility for the decision with
the parties. 59
New PS
11 Charging for services
There are three provisions in this section which, in brief, provide that: a mediator must obtain the participants' agreement
as to the amount of fees and how they are to be apportioned (11.1); a mediator must not charge fees based on the
outcome of the mediation “or calculated in a way that could influence the manner in which the mediator conducts the
mediation” (11.2); and a mediator will return promptly any fees or charges paid in advance which exceed the amount
payable (11.3). 141
Old PS
12 Charges for services
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 25
Statement of principle: Mediators should make all charges explicit to the parties and explain how they are calculated. OMITTED
12: This section contained six points in relation to the charging of fees. In addition to the three points addressed in s 11 of
the new PS (see above), s 12 provided as follows:
• The mediator will explain any fees to be charged, ie he or she will explain how the fees are to be calculated, and any
related costs (s 12.1). • Any written agreement with the participants should include a description of any fee arrangement with the mediator (s
12.2). • While mediators cannot set fees on the basis of the mediation outcome, it is not unethical for a mediator to act pro
bono or to leave to the discretion of the parties the payment of any fees (s 12.3). The underlined portions have been OMITTED. Commentary: s 11 Charging for services
New PS s 11
Section 11 of the new PS picks up three points from s 12 of the old PS, but omits the three additional points mentioned
above. Section 11:
• Does not appear to require mediators to explain how their fees are calculated. • Does not require the agreement in relation to fees to be in writing (to be fair, neither did s 12.2 of the old PS, but
mention of “any written agreement” including a description of any fee arrangement might have encouraged all
concerned to record their agreement in writing). • Might discourage mediators from offering their services on a pro bono basis or from mediating with organisations
such as the Legal Aid Office and community justice programs where mediators are paid at minimal rates. If a
mediator is conducting a mediation on a pro bono basis, he or she might well set time constraints on the mediation
which would not apply if the mediator was conducting the mediation at their normal rate of remuneration. Section
11.2 should be amended along the lines of the wording used in s 12.3 of the old PS. New PS
12 Provision of information and promotion of services
12.1: “A mediator must accurately represent their qualifications and experience and how they conduct their mediations”. 12.2: “A mediator must not guarantee results or outcomes from the mediation process or make statements likely to create
false expectations about favourable results”. Regard should also be had to s 10.1(c)(viii) which requires honesty in marketing and advertising. Also see s 12.3 (any information used for evaluation purposes must be de-identified) and s 12.4 (a mediator qualified under
this scheme can describe themselves as “Accredited Mediator NMAS”).