WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 9
Old PS
3 Starting a mediation process
Statement of principle: “Before mediating, a mediator should ensure that an outline of the mediation process has been
given to the participants”. This statement has been subsumed within the provisions of s 3.1 of the new PS. 3.1: “The diversity in mediation practice means that there are considerable differences in terms of how participants
enter into a mediation process”. OMITTED3.2: “Prior to the mediation taking place, the mediator will ensure that the
participants have been provided with an explanation of the process and have had an opportunity to reach agreement about
the way in which the process is to be conducted”. OMITTED.3.3: Sets out some of the possible objectives of an intake
process, such as: (a) determining whether mediation is appropriate; (b) assisting participants to prepare for the process;
(c) ensuring that every participant receives information about the roles of each party in the mediation; and (g) settling
venue and timing issues.3.4: Listed things that the mediator should do in intake or during the mediation including: (a)
“describe and explain the mediation process that is to be used”; (b) discuss the appropriateness of the process, its benefits
and risks, in the light of the participants' particular circumstances; (c) “discuss the confidentiality of the mediation and
any limitations on such confidentiality”; (f) explain indemnity provisions contained in any agreement to mediate; (g)
advise participants of the mediator's role in relation to the provision of advice or other services; and (h)(ii) advise “how
participants may seek information and advice from a variety of sources during the process”. The underlined provisions
have been OMITTED. 3.5: Encouraged the participants to enter into a written mediation agreement. It also encouraged the mediator to record, in
writing, the participants' understanding and agreement with respect to entry into mediation and confidentiality (or waiver
of confidentiality). It applied whether mediation came about by private agreement or pursuant to legislation. The section
has been OMITTED. 3.6: Instructed mediators to provide a copy of the Standards to the participants (or at least, to advise them how they could
get a copy). OMITTED
120
Commentary: s 3 Conducting mediation: Preliminary conference or intake
New PS s 3.1
Section 3.1(a) of the new PS takes up most of the statement of principle from s 3 of the old PS: mediators have to give the
participants a description of the mediation process and the steps involved. No guidance is given as to how detailed this
information should be, so this decision will be left to individual mediators. Under s 3.1(b) of the new PS, mediators also have to advise participants about how to make a formal complaint “in relation
to the mediator”. It might be prudent to expand this provision so that participants are also made aware of how to make a
complaint in relation to the relevant mediation organisation or body (eg Relationships Australia or the AAT). New PS s 3.2
Section 3.2 of the new PS is in similar terms to, and covers all major issues from, s 3.3 of the old PS. It sets out the
objectives of, and a list of matters to be undertaken in, a preliminary conference or intake session. However, as discussed
below, many provisions from s 3 of the old PS have been omitted. Under the old PS, mediators were required to inform the participants of how to access the Standards (see s 3.6 of the
old PS).