9 These are ambitious goals and the extent to which the NMAS achieves
them is debatable. 111
The second provision in Part I deals with the application of the standards. The standards: 10
apply when a person is seeking accreditation in relation to and conducting mediation processes as defined in Section 2
of the Practice Standards. When a person practises as a mediator in other contexts, such as hybrid, blended or statutory
environments, additional requirements relevant to that context may apply.11
The implications of this provision, with its cross-reference to the definition of mediation in s 2, are discussed further in the
commentary to s 2.2 below. Part I of the new PS then describes the mediator's role, in the following terms: “A mediator uses the knowledge, skills and
ethical principles referred to in Part III s 10.1 of the NMAS to assist participants to make their own decisions in relation to
disputes, conflicts or differences among them”.12 The words “knowledge, skills and ethical principles” complicate the sentence,
as does the reference to “Part III Section 10.1”. A simple alternative sentence is suggested in the commentary to s 2.1 below. Standards of conduct perform an educative function for mediators, for other people who participate or who are thinking of
participating in mediation, and more generally for members of the public. The first three provisions in Part I are most likely to
be the first paragraphs that non-mediators will read. Currently, they are worded for mediators. Ideally, they should be written
with the “lay” participant in mind. More user-friendly ways of introducing mediation to the community need to be adopted. Turning now to examine the PS contained in Part III of the NMAS documentation, the table below compares the PS. It
examines first the provision/s of the new PS, followed by the “corresponding” provision/s of the old PS, followed by the author's
commentary on the revisions and on mediator standards generally. These are not official comments released by the NMAS
drafting body (some standards and codes of conduct contain an official commentary following each rule or standard 13 but
that format has not been adopted in the NMAS Practice Standards). There is one change in format which is best noted at the
beginning. The old PS, beginning at s 2, contained a statement of principle (for want of a better phrase) immediately following
the section heading.14 This format has not been retained in the new PS and all statements of principle have been omitted, though
in some instances the content of the statement has been absorbed into the main provisions. The other general comment, an
important one, is that the language of the standards has changed so that practitioners are told that they “must” do such and such,
rather than merely that they “should” do such and such. The new PS are more prescriptive in style.15 In the table which follows,
text from the old PS which has been omitted from the new PS, is underlined and marked as “OMITTED”. This format allows
readers to see, at a glance, the many important provisions that have been deleted from the original PS. 112
NMAS Practice Standards 2015 (new PS), Part III
1 Application
1.1: “The Practice Standards apply to NMAS accredited mediators” (cf s 1.1 of the old PS).