Should mediators be subject to a separate prohibition against misleading or
deceiving? The PS offer no specific guidance for mediators on these important matters. Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 29
The answer to some of these questions might be different for lawyer mediators, as opposed to non-lawyer mediators. Lawyer
mediators continue to be bound by the rules of conduct of the legal profession – thus they owe general duties of honesty, fairness
and courtesy to all parties with whom they deal. 61 The interplay between mediator duties and the duties of lawyers has yet
to be explored. Outcome fairness
What responsibility, if any, does a mediator have for outcome fairness? Assuming the procedure used in mediation is fair, that
the participants appear to be making fully informed decisions and that the proposed outcome does not involve the commission
of an offence or fraud, should a mediator intervene to protect a participant against a manifestly unfair agreement and if so,
what interventions are permitted? If a mediator intervenes, he or she may be breaching the most fundamental of obligations
– to assist participants to make their own decisions. This issue has been debated for decades and there is no clear agreement
by practitioners and scholars. For example, Schuwerk argues that “if it (the outcome) is a clearly unjust outcome, the dilemma
of whether or not to intervene should be decided in favour of intervention”. 62 But Bush and Stulberg take the view that “it is
not the mediator's job to guarantee a fair agreement, or any agreement at all; it is the mediator's job to guarantee the parties
the fullest opportunity for self-determination and mutual acknowledgment”. 63 At the minimum, the PS might alert mediators
to these diverse views. As part of their training, mediators should at least acquire techniques for raising matters of outcome
fairness in the consciousness of the participants. A related issue concerns mediation and third parties. Interests of third parties
Assuming again that the procedure used is fair and that the proposed outcome does not involve the commission of an offence or
fraud, should a mediator intervene to protect the interests of third parties, ie those who are not party to the mediation but who are
affected by it? The answer may depend on the subject matter of the dispute. For example, in family law disputes an obligation
to consider the interests of children is imposed on mediators (and legal representatives) by relevant legislation. 64 What about
in other contexts?