Section 1.2(c) picks up the provisions of s 1.3 of the old PS (there being no s 1.2(c) in the old PS). It is straightforward. It
emphasises the fact that the NMAS is a voluntary accreditation system and that persons who become accredited must be
prepared to comply with the Approval Standards as well as the PS. New PS s 1.3
The terms of s 1.3 of the new PS are almost identical to those of s 1.5 of the old PS. If there is an inconsistency between
the PS and relevant legislative provisions pursuant to which a mediator is engaged (eg such as those pertaining to family
law, or to civil procedure law in many jurisdictions),16 the legislative provisions will prevail. Provisions omitted from old PS s 1
There are a number of important provisions that have been jettisoned from s 1.1 of the old PS. These provisions
communicated to all stakeholders, from the very first paragraph, a clear statement as to who the PS applied to, a definition
of mediation, a sense of the purpose of mediation and of the role of a mediator, all conveyed in easy to understand terms
and without any need to cross-reference to other sections. The new PS do deal with the role of a mediator, both in Part
I and also in ss 2.1 and 2.2, but the terms used might be difficult for some people to understand (see the discussion
pertaining to s 2). Section 1.1 of the old PS clearly specified the relationships the PS were intended to govern. Again, this provision has been
whittled down and the new PS appear only to govern the relationship between mediators and participants, though there is
some mention of “others” in s 1.2(b) and reference to colleagues in s 8. However, there is no sense that the new PS also
govern the mediator's relationship to courts and tribunals, and to the general public. On this point, the provision (the last
sentence) from s 1.1 of the old PS is to be preferred. 114
Section 1.1 of the old PS mentions that mediation can be used “to form a future plan of action” and to make decisions
“about future actions and outcomes”.