Again, this provision has been
whittled down and the new PS appear only to govern the relationship between mediators and participants, though there is
some mention of “others” in s 1.2(b) and reference to colleagues in s 8. However, there is no sense that the new PS also
govern the mediator's relationship to courts and tribunals, and to the general public. On this point, the provision (the last
sentence) from s 1.1 of the old PS is to be preferred. 114
Section 1.1 of the old PS mentions that mediation can be used “to form a future plan of action” and to make decisions
“about future actions and outcomes”. These references have been omitted from the new PS. (While mediation is described
as a decision-making process in ss 2.1 and 2.2 of the new PS, there is no mention of the making of decisions about future
plans, actions and outcomes.) As a result, two important points have been lost from the old PS. First, mediation is not just a
dispute resolution process. It can be used for other purposes, such as to negotiate the terms of an agreement between parties
who have never dealt with each other before. Second, even if mediation is being used to resolve a dispute, it is often times
future-focused and not necessarily concerned with laying blame for past events. The omission of s 1.4 of the old PS is of particular concern. It helped inform participants, potential participants, courts and
tribunals, and members of the public about many aspects of mediation, including: its diversity as a practice as well as the
diversity of mediators; its capacity to deal with a range of disputes; its use for dispute resolution and “deal” making; and
the ways in which mediation might come about. New PS
2 The mediation process
2.1: “A mediator uses the knowledge, skills and ethical principles referred to in Part III Section 10.1 of the NMAS to assist
participants to make their own decisions in relation to disputes, conflicts or differences among them” (cf ss 2.1 and 7.3 of
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 6
the old PS). This provision is identical to the description of the “role of mediators in a mediation process”, used in Part I to
the new NMAS documentation. 2.2: Defines mediation as:
a process that promotes the self-determination of participants and in which participants, with the support of a mediator:
(a) communicate with each other, exchange information and seek understanding;
(b) identify, clarify and explore interests, issues and underlying needs;
(c) consider their alternatives;
(d) generate and evaluate options;
(e) negotiate with each other; and
(f) reach and make their own decisions. The section continues: “A mediator does not evaluate or advise on the merits of, or determine the outcome of,
disputes” (emphasis added). The footnote in this provision refers the reader to s 10.2 and mentions the possibility of a
mediator using a blended process (cf s 2.7 of the old PS). 115
Old PS
2 Description of a mediation process
Statement of principle: “[t]he purpose of a mediation process is to maximise participants' decision making”. The statement
has been OMITTED
2.1: Stated that mediation “is a process in which the participants, with the support of a mediator, identify issues, develop
options, consider alternatives and make decisions about future actions and outcomes.