Resort might be had to the work of scholars such as Welch and Nolan-Haley to
fill the gaps. The essential elements of self-determination are: 36
• Active and direct participation by the parties in the process of communication and negotiation. • Informed consent on the part of the parties as to both process and outcome. The parties must have sufficient
information (including information as to the available alternatives to an offered settlement) to make an informed
decision. • V oluntariness by the parties in coming to a decision. (The idea that the parties must enter into mediation voluntarily
has long been dismissed). Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 16
• Absence of coercion on the parties in coming to a decision. The parties must retain the ability to accept or reject any
particular outcome. 37
New PS s 7.5
Again, s 7.5 of the new PS is almost identical to s 9.2 of the old PS except that the “will” has become a “must”. Participants must be given “appropriate opportunities to speak to and be heard by one another” and to articulate their
needs, interests and issues. A mediator cannot guarantee that one participant will “hear” the other in the true sense of the
term but the mediator can create an environment and establish ground rules which will maximise the possibility of the
participants hearing, listening to and understanding each other. Mediators usually set three behavioural guidelines for the
conduct of mediation. These are that the parties do not interrupt each other, do not denigrate each other, and treat each
other in a respectful manner. 38 Most mediators will intervene to correct inappropriate behaviour on the part of participants
such as: attempting to cross-examine or interrogate their opponent; not allowing their opponent to speak freely; making
threats; or putting their opponent down, eg by name-calling. 129
New PS s 7.6
The provision in s 7.6 (and its equivalent in s 9.5 of the old PS) is laudable – a mediator must ensure that participants have
“sufficient time and opportunity” to access advice or information “necessary for their decision-making” (emphasis added). This is a necessary part of ensuring informed consent by the parties. However, if a participant does not have the means,
ability, financial resources etc required to gain access to and understand the advice or information, that participant will not
be in a position to make a fully informed decision. Mediators will be faced with an ethical dilemma (one which should
be highlighted by the Standards): should they let a party enter into an agreement without all the necessary information
(thus putting at risk or undermining the value of self-determination) or provide them with the missing information (thus
compromising the value of impartiality)?