Old PS
4 Power issues
Statement of principle: “Mediators shall have completed training that assists them to recognise power imbalance and
issues related to control and intimidation and take appropriate steps to manage the mediation process accordingly.”
OMITTED4.1: “Some disputes may not be appropriate for mediation processes because of power imbalance, safety,
control and/or intimidation issues”. OMITTED
4.2: Set out various measures that mediators might take to ensure the safety of participants whenever “abuse is present, or
implied or threatened”. The measures are much the same as those now appearing in s 6.2 of the new PS. Commentary: s 6 Power and safety
New PS s 6.1
In order to better understand s 6 of the new PS, regard must first be had to s 10 which sets out the knowledge and skills
required of mediators. According to s 10.1, mediators must be knowledgeable in the dynamics of power (s 10.1(a)(i))
and they must have the ability to manage high emotions and power imbalances (s 10.1(b)(vi)). These provisions are not
exhaustive. For example, mediators might also be trained to identify possible source/s of power imbalance. Section 6.1 then comes into play. The section is deficient in two respects. First, the section should remind mediators
that not all disputes are appropriate for mediation because of issues relating to power and the safety of participants (the
statement which was included in s 4.1 of the old PS, which has been omitted, should be replaced). The majority of the
provisions in s 6 assume that mediation has commenced. The very first provision in s 6 should remind mediators that some
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 13
disputes are not appropriate for mediation because of power disparity and that mediation should not be commenced in
these cases. Second, s 6.1 suggests that a mediator need only be alert to changing balances of power and not to pre-existing imbalances
of power. Mediators need to be alert to power disparity from the very beginning. 125
Section 6.2 is adequate. However, there are no strategies offered to deal with two very common sources of power
imbalance: 1) when one party has access to more/better information and advice; and 2) when one party has access to
greater financial resources (the two power sources will often overlap). Mediators can provide participants with information
about other services and resources but this is of limited use in many circumstances. They cannot provide missing
information themselves without jeopardising their impartiality.