Mediation is essentially
a process that maximises the self determination of the participants. The principle of self-determination requires that
mediation processes be non-directive as to content.” OMITTED2.6: It provided that the giving of “expert information”
by the mediator would not infringe upon participant self-determination and was consistent with the mediation process,
provided the information was “couched in general and non-prescriptive terms” and was presented at a time when it could
be integrated into the participants' decision making. OMITTED
2.7: In certain circumstances, mediators might use a “blended process” model of mediation “whereby they provide
advice” (so long as it was requested by the parties and also “given in a manner that enhances the principle of self-
determination”). Commentary: s 2 The mediation process
New PS s 2.1
Section 2.1 of the new PS repeats the information given in Part I about the role of a mediator. The reference to
“knowledge, skills and ethical principles” and the cross-reference to s 10.1 are unnecessary complications from the
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 7
perspective of a lay person. A better alternative might be to state that: “A mediator assists participants to make their own
decisions in relation to disputes, conflicts or differences among them”. 116
New PS s 2.2
Section 2.2 provides a definition of mediation. 17 At least one author maintains that the opening words of s 2.2 represent
a change of focus in the Standards, from mediator “neutrality” as an ethical framework for mediation, to one based on
participant self-determination. 18 There is no doubt that the word “neutrality” has been deleted from the list of ethical
competences or understandings required by a mediator (see s 10.1(c)) and that participant “self-determination” is now an
explicit part of the definition of mediation in s 2.2. While there is some debate over the values that underpin mediation,
there is wide agreement that “self-determination” is its central value. 19 Consequently, both of these revisions improve the
PS (the current thinking in relation to neutrality is discussed later in connection with s 10.1).