Consideration should be given to reintroducing the section. Disappointingly, there is less emphasis in the new PS on protecting the interests of others affected by the outcome of
mediation with the omission of ss 2.3 and 2.4(g) of the old PS. There is some provision for the protection of “vulnerable
stakeholders” in s 8.4 of the new PS, but it is suggested that this is insufficient. Two sentences from s 2.5 of the old PS have been omitted from the new PS. Each sentence is important and should have
been retained. The first sentence states that “[m]ediation is essentially a process that maximises the self determination of
the participants”. It emphasised in the clearest possible terms that self-determination is, if not the central value, then at least
one of the central values of mediation. The second sentence to be omitted stated that “the principle of self-determination
requires that mediation processes be non-directive as to content”. This sentence was intended, primarily, for the education
of mediators. Today we recognise that most process interventions also have an impact on the outcome of mediation, but
this sentence reminded mediators that they should, as humanly as possible, refrain from adopting techniques which direct
the parties towards particular outcomes. There is value in adding these sentences back into the PS. Section 2.6 of the old PS recognised that parties must be fully informed about a range of matters before they can truly
make their own decisions (self-determine) and it permitted a mediator to give the parties expert information provided it
was couched in general and non-prescriptive terms and was given at a time which enabled the parties to integrate it into
their decision-making. A mediator could not give specific and prescriptive advice unless acknowledging that he or she was
using a blended model as provided for in s 2.7 of the old PS. These provisions were reinforced by the terms of s 10.1 of the
old PS. Under the new PS, mediators are no longer allowed to give the parties “general and non-prescriptive” information. They may give advice providing the terms of s 10.2 are fulfilled. 119
New PS
3 Conducting mediation: Preliminary conference or intake
3.1: A mediator must, in a preliminary conference or intake session, ensure that participants are provided with: “(a)
a description of mediation and the steps involved including the use of joint sessions, separate sessions and shuttle
negotiations; (b) information on how to provide feedback or lodge a formal complaint in relation to the mediator” (cf
statement of principle for s 3, and ss 3.2, 3.4 and 6 of the old PS). 3.2: Sets out tasks which might be undertaken in the preliminary conference or intake session including: (a) “assessing
whether mediation is suitable”; (b) “explaining to participants the nature and content of any agreement or requirement to
enter into mediation including confidentiality, costs and how they are to be paid”; (c) identifying who is participating; (f)
referring participants to other sources of information, advice or support; and (g) informing “participants about their roles
and those of advisors, support persons, interpreters and any other attendees” (cf ss 3.3 and 3.4 of the old PS). As was the case under the old PS, someone other than the mediator may conduct the preliminary conference or intake
session (s 3.1) (cf s 3.2 of the old PS). Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation...