The mediator acts as a third party to
assist the participants to reach their decision”. Some of this sub-section has survived and is incorporated into s 2.2 of the
new PS but the underlined portions have been OMITTED.2.2: Provided that “[m]ediation processes are not a substitute for
individual or organisational legal and/or other expert advice, or individual counselling or therapy. Mediation processes may
not be appropriate for all disputants or all types of disputes”. OMITTED
2.3: “The goal of a mediation process is agreed upon by the participants with the assistance of the mediator. Examples of
goals may include assisting the participants to make a wise decision, to clarify the terms of a workable agreement and/or
future patterns of communication that meet the participants' needs and interests, as well as the needs and interests of others
who are affected by the dispute.” OMITTED2.4: Set out potential benefits of mediation, eg it may assist the participants
“to communicate and exchange relevant information”, “invite the clarification of issues”, “provide opportunities for
understanding” and so on. Most of this content has been incorporated into s 2.2 of the new PS. However, there is one
important exception. Section 2.4(g) which provided that mediation may “promote a focus on the interests and needs of
those who may be subject to, or affected by, the situation and proposed options” has been OMITTED. 2.5: “Mediators do not advise upon, evaluate or determine disputes. They assist in managing the process of dispute
and conflict resolution whereby the participants agree upon the outcomes, when appropriate. Mediation is essentially
a process that maximises the self determination of the participants. The principle of self-determination requires that
mediation processes be non-directive as to content.” OMITTED2.6: It provided that the giving of “expert information”
by the mediator would not infringe upon participant self-determination and was consistent with the mediation process,
provided the information was “couched in general and non-prescriptive terms” and was presented at a time when it could
be integrated into the participants' decision making. OMITTED
2.7: In certain circumstances, mediators might use a “blended process” model of mediation “whereby they provide
advice” (so long as it was requested by the parties and also “given in a manner that enhances the principle of self-
determination”). Commentary: s 2 The mediation process
New PS s 2.1
Section 2.1 of the new PS repeats the information given in Part I about the role of a mediator. The reference to
“knowledge, skills and ethical principles” and the cross-reference to s 10.1 are unnecessary complications from the
Mediator standards of conduct: A commentary to the revised National Mediator..., (2016) 5 Journal of Civil
Litigation... WESTLAW   ©  Thomson Reuters. 7
perspective of a lay person. A better alternative might be to state that: “A mediator assists participants to make their own
decisions in relation to disputes, conflicts or differences among them”. 116
New PS s 2.2
Section 2.2 provides a definition of mediation. 17 At least one author maintains that the opening words of s 2.2 represent
a change of focus in the Standards, from mediator “neutrality” as an ethical framework for mediation, to one based on
participant self-determination.